--- Page 1 ---
[OCR] Early} Visitors to Easter Island
1864-1877 |

A ship of thé'time of the stavers. From M°E. Maude, 1981: cal
Slavers in Paradise: The Peruvian Slave Trade in Polynesia, 4862-1864. eigen



--- Page 2 ---
This volume is edited by Georgia Lee, Ann M. Altman and 
Frank Morin. The reports were translated from the French by 
Ann M. Altman. 
The photograph of Pierre Loci (Julien Viaud) on page 65 and 
the drawing of the Chief's house on page 71, is by courtesy of 
the Rochefort-Maison de Pierre Loci, France; the photograph of 
Alphonse Pinart, page 109, is by courtesy of the Bancroft Li-
brary, University of California, Berkeley. Thanks also to Earl 
and Countess Waldegrave for use of the watercolor on 
pages 6-7. The chart of ship arrivals is reprinted here with per-
mission of Grant McCall. Our sincere thanks to all for these 
valuable additions to this publication . 
The translated Eyraud report was originally published in Rapa 
Nui Journal, Vol. 17 (1 ), 2003; the Roussel report was originally 
published in Rapa Nui Journal, Vol. 17 (3), 2003; and the Pinart 
report was originally published in Rapa Nui Journal, Vol. 18(1), 
2004. 
Cover: Louis Choris "Habitants de l'Ile de Paques" Paris 1822. 
From S. Chauvet 1934, Figure 13. 
© The Easter Island Foundation 2004 
rapanuibooks@att.net 
www.islandheritage.org 
Bearsville Press, PO Box 6774, Los Osos, CA 93412 
All profits from the sale of this publication benefit the 
Easter Island Foundation 
ISBN: 1-880636-05-0 
11 
' " 
EA.RbY VISI~ORS ~O EA.SCJ'ER ISI,A.ND 
1864-18~~ 
THE REPORTS OF EUGENE EYRAUD, 
HIPPOLYTE ROUSSEL, PIERRE LOTI, AND 
ALPHONSE PINART 
TRANSLATED BY ANN M. ALTMAN 
INTRODUCTION BY GEORGIA LEE 
llt * &:x:;s * x:s * * 


--- Page 3 ---
., 
lJ..J ~ 
-J 
., 
-J 
Ill . 
~ ·• 
lu 
" 
!! 
I .. i 
0 
'lu 
0 
A map of Easter Island showing routes taken by Eyraud, and 
landing places at Anakena and Hanga Roa. From Trip around the 
World in 18 7 8, by Librarie Hachette. 
lV 
Early Visitors to Easter Island 1864-1877 
.-able of Gontents 
MAP OF EASTER ISLAND 
lV 
INTRODUCTION 
vu 
EUGENE EYRAUD 
1 
HIPPOLYTE ROUSSEL 
37 
PIERRE LOTI CTULIAN VIAUD) 
63 
ALPHONSE PINART 
107 
V 


--- Page 4 ---
There exists in the midst of the great ocean, in a re-
gion where nobody goes, a mysterious and isolated 
island; no other land is near it and for more than 
eight hundred leagues in all directions empty and ter-
rifying immensities surround it. 
Pierre Loti 
V1 
Early Visitors to Easter Island 1864-1877 
IntPocl.uction 
W 
ithout exception, the early visitors to Easter Island came 
from European countries - Holland, France, Spain, 
England, Russia, and Germany. Their letters and reports, many 
of them very valuable accounts of life on the island in those 
early days, were written and sometimes published in the lan-
guages of the countries from which the explorers came. While 
the reports by English-speaking arrivals to the island have been 
accessible to English readers, not all of those written in a foreign 
language have been translated into English. For example, it was 
not until 199 5 that the Geiseler report of 1883 was finally trans-
lated from the German and published in English (Ayres and 
Ayres 1995). 
We are grateful to our translator, Ann M. Altman, for providing 
us with these early-day accounts of Rapa Nui, originally written 
in French. Thanks to Judith Schwartz for the photograph of 
Eugene Eyraud, which she took on Easter Island at the site 
where he is memorialized. Judith was also partially responsible 
for the development of the ideas that led to the production of 
this book. Grant McCall kindly gave permission to use a portion 
of his list of ships that came to the island between 1722 and 
1879 (see Appendix). 
The first two of the letters in this compilation were written by 
missionaries and were intended for their superiors in the 
Church. Lay brother Eugene Eyraud was the first foreigner to 
live on the island; he survived under very difficult conditions for 
nine months. Later on, he returned with Father Rousse~ who 
also wrote a letter describing his life on Easter Island. 
The romantic story by Pierre Loti and the report by Alphonse 
Pinart are more of general impressions and the result of very 
Vil 


--- Page 5 ---
Introduction 
brief visits. But together, all four of these accounts provide a 
fascinating glimpse of life on Rapa Nui in those early days. This 
material is important because it elucidates archaic culture traits 
and provides information on the society in that period of time, 
just after the disastrous slave raids of 1863 which left only a 
small remnant of the original population on the island. 
The slave raids, perpetrated by Peruvians, were initiated in order 
to provide cheap labor in Peru and, not incidentall y, to make 
fortunes for the slavers. Easter Island was not the only island 
impacted; the slave ships roamed over much of the South Pa-
cific, kidnapping all the Polynesians they could lay hands on. But 
Easter was the closest to South America, and it was the hardest 
hit (1faude 1981). Eventuall y a public outcry instigated by the 
Bishop of Tahiti resulted in an attempt to round up the survi-
vors and return them to their home islands. Few were still alive, 
and these were crowded onto a ship to be sent back to their 
home islands. But smallpo x broke out and when the ship 
reached Easter Island, only fifteen of the Rapanui were still 
alive. They were put off on the island, bringing a smallpox epi-
demic that nearly destro yed the remaining population. By 1877 
only 110 Rapanui remained on the island. 
Thus, when Brother Eugene Eyraud arrived, he came at a time 
of great upheaval, as attempts were being made to readjust after 
the loss of the chiefs and priests, parents and children. There 
also was the problem of re-assignment of lands , some of which 
were left ownerless as a result of the slave raids. It appears to 
have been a time of considerable anarchy on the island. 
Lay brother Eugene Eyraud came as a Mission of the Congrega-
tion des Sacres Coeurs of Picpus, arriving from Tahiti one year 
after the slave raids. Eyraud was accompanied by six Rapanui 
who had been repatriated after the slave raids. Eyraud was the 
first foreigner to remain on the island, staying for nine months. 
He attempted to instruct the islanders in Christianity but he met 
with difficulties and severe hardships. We hear his story in his 
Vlll 
Early Visitors to Easter Island 1864-1877 
letter, as he describes his nine-months on Rapa Nui in 1864, and 
his own account of his experiences as the first missionary to live 
on Rapa Nui. 
Eugene Eyraud wrote other letters . One that was dated 1864 is 
Lettres des Missionaires and it was written to Tres Reverend Pere 
Euthyme Rouchouze (1812-1869) who was the third head 
(1853-1869) of the Congregation des Sacres Creurs (SS.CC). 
That letter was Eyraud's attempt to convince the SS.CC that 
they should send another mission to Rapa Nui-
one that would 
include himself, naturally. Eventually they did so, but Eyraud 
was not in charge; he returned to the island with Father Hip-
polyte (Basile) Roussel in 1866, accompanied by three Mangare-
vans. 
Eyraud died of tuberculosis in 1868 and was buried on Rapa 
Nui. While trying to save Rapanui souls, he infected many of the 
islanders with the disease. 
Fatiier Roussel transferred to Rapa Nui from Mangareva, where 
he had been working with the strong -willed Father Honore La-
val. His mission, with the help of Eyraud, was to establish the 
first permanent European settlement on the island. Eyraud and 
Roussel landed on Rapa Nui in March 1866. Roussel , a rather 
more aggressive personality than Eyraud, carried a cane with a 
leaded top and used it liberally when threatened by islanders. 
Following the death of Eyraud, Roussel stayed until 1871, when 
he returned to Mangareva with 168 passage-paying Rapanui 
(they had paid with their lands on Rapa Nui) . At that time there 
were only 936 people living in the Gambier Islands and the in-
flux of Rapanui was an attempt to repopulate the archipelago -
at the expense of Easter Island. Roussel ended his days in Man-
gareva, dying there 27 years later. Roussel's notes, written in 
1869, are a precious contribution to historic studies and describe 
some of the details of the lives of the islanders. 
1X 


--- Page 6 ---
Introduction 
In 1872, Louis Marie Julien Viaud (who wrote under the pseu-
donym Pierre Loti) came to the island on the French warship, 
La Flore. A naval cadet and a gifted artist, he left us many inter-
esting sketches of the island as well as a lively description of 
Rapa Nui at that time. His writing combines a nai:ve charm with 
a romantic view of the island. In contrast to the others, Lori's 
writing is evocative and sensual; he describes the wind, the 
smells, the vistas, the colors. 
Lori remained in the French navy, attaining the rank of captain 
in 1906. He wrote numerous books and short stories and, con-
sidered one of the most original of the French writers of the 
second half of the 19th century, he was elevated to the French 
Academy in 1891. One of Lori's best-known works is the Mar-
riage ojLoti, published in 1880 . It was this book that convinced 
Paul Gauguin to move to Tahiti. Loti died in 1923. 
Five years after the visit by Loti and only thirteen years after Ey-
raud first arrived to the island, a French warship, Seignelqy, 
sailed 
into Easter Island's waters on April 1, 1877, and anchored at La 
Perouse bay. One of the passengers, Alfonse Pinart (1852-1911 ), 
wrote a report about his short six-day stay on the island. 
Louis Alphonse Pinart, born in France, was an anthropologist, 
ethnologist and linguist. His work, somewhat ignored in his 
own country, was better appreciated in the United States. He 
was the son of a wealthy master-blacksmith and early on devel-
oped a passion for the New World. He was nineteen when he 
embarked on his adventures, exploring the Bering Sea, the Aleu-
tians, Alaska, Easter Island, Haiti and the Antilles. He studied 
petroglyphs in Puerto Rico, visited Panama, Central America, 
and Colombia. He explored in Canada and conducted research 
in California and Arizona. He received the Medal of the Societe 
de Geographie and donated large collections of botanical sam-
ples and ethnographic material, including his collection of Es-
kimo masks, to various museums in France . 
X 
Early Visitors to Easter Island 1864-1877 
When Pinart reached Easter Island, he was twenty-five years old 
and already an astute _observer. His descriptions are quite good 
as well as being very evocative, and with a poetic aspect that is 
missing from both reports by Eyraud and Roussel. One can im-
mediately place the spot at Rana Raraku where he and his com-
panions camped: "Below us, the steep cliff was lost in the shad-
ows of the night; to our left, a rough sea roared and the fevered 
noise of the waves was mixed with the howling of the wind and 
rain. Opposite, far away, the interior of the island appeared 
vaster and darker, with its clusters of mimosa and mulberry trees 
bent by the storm. Behind us, the back of the cave was illumi-
nated by the campfire whose glow flickered over the statues and 
created the impression of a troupe of monstrous phantoms, 
awakened by the sound of our footsteps or, more likely, a gath-
ering of the spirits from Vahou." 
Despite the short time spent on Easter Island, he managed to 
cover a good bit of the island, and paid a visit to the widow of 
Dutrou-Bornier . His drawings, most of them made long after 
the visit and from memory, are quite fanciful. Pinart died in 
1911, having exhausted his fortune on his explorations and 
travels. 
Unlike Pinart, Eyraud and Roussel were not trained as anthro-
pologists; their concern was with saving souls. They seem to 
have taken little notice of the archaeological remains on the is-
land or of the native belief system. This was also true of Father 
Gaspard Zuhmbohm (1872-3, ms. Addressed to the director of 
the Annuals of the Propagation of the Faith in Rome, Cat. 
#356) who was on the island in those early days. Zuhmbohm 
wrote: "A word about their hieroglyphen [petroglyphs]; several 
times we have found close to the ocean several stones which 
show traces of chisel work, but as we saw that the natives 
showed no worry about them, we thought we should not give 
them our thoughts." And Roussel, writing to Bishop Tepano in 
Pape'ete on 2 July 1878, stated that, ''With the captain I visited 
the exterior border of Rana Kau. For the second or third time I 
X1 


--- Page 7 ---
Introduction 
revisited those two lines of cells made in stone [Orongo]. These 
somber and sad palaces of the "matato'a' of the "ao". · I did not 
find anything worth mentioning, a few old of paintings , that 
have, in white, black and red colors representing ships, etc., but 
not one incision in the rocks .1 I was told later that in the moun-
tain in the middle of the island there are some gross stones with 
marks and written inscriptions. I regret not to have had the time 
to go there to check it." 
In contrast to the missionaries, Loci and Pinart had a keen eye. 
And although their observations are limited due to their brief 
visits, their notes and comments are of considerable importance. 
While Loti focused on the islanders themselves, with only pe-
ripheral interest in the island's archaeology, Pinart studied the 
statue quarry and postulated ways in which the statues were 
carved and moved . He closely examined ahu and other cultural 
features. 
With all four of these early visitors to Rapa Nui, there were mis-
understandings, as might be expected . Eyraud and Roussel may 
have been deliberately misinformed, and while Loci and Pinart 
misinterpreted many of the cultural elements that they observed, 
their lively descriptions make for fascinating reading. 
- Georgia Lee 
Endnote 
1How he could have missed the magnificent petroglyph s at Orongo is yet 
another mystery. 
References 
Ayers, W. S. and G . Ayres. 1995. Geiseler's E aster Island Report. An 1880s A n-
thropological Account. Asian and Pacific Archaeology Series 12. University 
ofH awai'i. 
Maude, H. E . 1981. S !avers in Paradise. The Peruvian Slave Trade in Po!Jnesia, 
1862-1864. Stanford Univer sity Pres s, Californi a. 
Xll 
flle SOjOUPR of the FiPst 
MisslonaPJ? on Rapa Nui 
\.._. 
Eugene Eytaud Among the Kanaes1, 1864 
cMan of Easter Island. Drawing by Radiguet, from Dupetit - Thouars, 1851. From S. 
Chauvet 1934, Figure 12. 
Fig 
12 


--- Page 8 ---
2 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
11 
U 
sing his own funds, Brother Eugene sailed from Tahiti to 
Rapa Nui, where he arrived on January 2, 1864, according 
to a letter 2 to the Father Superior in Paris from Father Olivier, 
an official of the Order in Valparaiso. The letter, dated Decem-
ber 1864 states: 
Brother Eugene made appropri-
ate preparations for his voyage. 
He took several bolts of cloth 
with which to dress the natives, 
some catpenter's tools, various 
pieces of timber and wood with 
which to build a cabin, a barrel 
of 
flour, two or three catechisms 
and prqyer books in Tahitian 
and, lastfy, a bell with which to 
call the natives to prqyer .... He 
also took jive sheep and some 
cuttings of trees that he hoped 
would adapt to the climate on 
Eajter Island. During the voy-
age, he tried to learn a few words 
of the local dialect from the na-
tives [four men, a woman and a 
child, who had been rescued cifter 
their capture l?J 
pirates] whom 
he was bringing back to the is-
Photograph by Judith Schwartz 
of a sketch of Eugene Eyraud from his 
memorial on Rapa Nui. 
land and he became friendfy with one of them, namefy, Pana. It was agreed 
that thry should disembark atAnakena, where Pana'sfamify lived, to fa -
cilitate Father Eugene's arrival on the island and his acceptanc
e !?)I its in-
habitants. 
Then Father Olivier adds: But here we are, on the verge of landing on 
Easter Island, so let us hear what Brother Eugene has to sqy:3 
On the twenty-fourth day of our journey, on January 2 1864, we 
caught our first glimpse of Easter Island, known as Rapa Nui to 
3 


--- Page 9 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
the islanders. The captain asked the islanders that we were 
bringing home with us whether they could see Anakena Bay, 
where I wished to disembark. After a few moments hesitation, 
because of the distance, they shouted, "That's Anakena!". 
The island looked very pleasant, especially after such a long voy-
age. It must be about 25 kilometers long and 17 wide. In gen-
eral, the coastline consists of precipitous rocky cliffs and there 
are few places where one can land easily. The landscape is much 
smoother than the cliffs, with three large "bosom -shaped" hills. 
From the top of these hills to the coast, the island is uniformly 
fertile. The same vegetation grows everywhere, with high grasses 
everywhere; there are no trees or tall plants; there are deep gul-
lies but no streams. Along the coast, there are three main bays 
where one can land: Anakena, in the north; Anarova [Hangaroa] 
in the northwest; and Vahui [V aihu), in the south. But these 
bays, if one can call them that, offer no shelter to large vessels. 
When we arrived at Anakena, the captain suggested that it might 
not be a good place to land. In fact, his desire to dock elsewhere 
was associated with an ulterior motive . However, I was deter-
mined to land at Anakena and I insisted to the captain that he 
let me disembark there. He protested that my baggage would get 
soaked but I said that would be only a small problem for me and 
that it was important to let the Kanacs [islanders) disembark im-
mediately so that they could introduce us to their compatriots 
and so that nobody would mistake us for pirates . The captain 
appeared to give his consent and ordered that a rowboat be 
launched from the ship. The Kanacs prepared to get into the 
boat but, since I had developed a bad headache, I lay down on 
my bed to rest for a moment. I had hardly fallen asleep when I 
was awakened by the noise of the Kanacs, who, I had assumed, 
had already landed. I went up on deck and saw that we were 
heading for another point on the coast. 
"Where are you going to let me go ashore?" I asked the captain. 
4 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
"How am I going to be able to transport my belongings from 
there to Anakena?" 
"Don't worry," he answered, "For a gift of four pieces of cloth 
to the Kanacs, I'll make sure that your things are taken wherever 
you want." 
"That's fine," I replied, "But will you also guarantee that I won't 
be robbed on the way?" 
The captain said nothing, the boat continued on its way and, in 
the evening, we arrived at Anarova. After testing the depth of 
the water, the captain decided that it would be unwise to dock 
so we went out into the open sea for the night. 
The next day, which was a Sunday, we finally landed. The 
second in command on the ship was a young Mangarevan called 
Daniel who spoke some English and French and who seemed to 
be able to make himself understood by the natives, whose 
language bore many similarities to that of the Gambier 
Archipelago. 4 He was given the job of taking the Kanacs ashore. 
He came back in a great hurry. Poor Daniel! He was beside 
himself. Even before coming back on board, he had an 
animated exchange with the captain, which I could not 
understand because it was in English . What was wrong? 
"I won't go back there for a thousand piastres," he told me, 
"Those are horrible-looking people . They are threatening, armed 
with spears, and most of them are totally naked. They look even 
more terrifying because of the feathers that they are wearing as 
decoration, their tattoos, and their wild cries. And there is 
smallpox all over the island. Some of the men who came back 
from Peru brought it and the epidemic has spread everywhere 
except to Anakena ." 
In fact, of one hundred unfortunates who boarded a ship in 
Peru, only fifteen had escaped death and they had infected their 
5 


--- Page 10 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
compatriots. The Kanacs who knew of this disease were 
horribly afraid of it. Daniel had heard them talk about it and, 
struck by the red complexions of the natives, he thought it was 
an effect of the scourge, whose effects had, in fact, been 
exaggerated. Thus, Daniel, afraid of the danger to which he 
thought he had been exposed, alerted all those on board . 
"The captain," he added, "will take you back to Tahiti for free. 
You shouldn't dream of going ashore - we might lose the 
rowboat and catch the disease." 
The picture here and on the next page is from a watercolor of Easter Island, 
painted by A. Mathews on March 6, 1830, from the ship Setingapatam. This 
view shows the east coast of the island, with Poike at the far left (Courtesy of 
Earl and Countess Waldegrave, England). 
"Return to Tahiti!" I replied . ''You must be joking .... Do you 
think I came on board for the pleasure of a sea voyage. The 
captain and the ship's supplier, when they agreed to bring me 
~ere, knew very well that there was smallpox here. In fact, they 
were the ones who first told me about it." 
So it was decided that I should go ashore alone and that I would 
6 
i 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
go by land to Anakena with Pana. The ship would meet me 
there the following day to unload my baggage. I jumped into the 
canoe and, while Daniel was rowing, I asked him to take back 
on board a bit of grass, which I had planned to pick on the 
shore, for my five sheep that remained on the ship and were 
dying of hunger. 
"Ah!' he said. ''Who knows if the captain will allow it on 
board?" "I understand," I replied, ''You think that smallpox can 
be transmitted via grass. Don't worry." 
Soon I was on land and pulled up several clumps of grass that I 
put into the rowboat myself. Daniel's trials were now over and 
off he went. Mine were just beginning: there I was in the midst 
of my new hosts . 
We should certainly excuse Daniel for being afraid. The 
multitude of men, women and children, perhaps as many as 
twelve hundred, was hardly reassuring. The men were armed 
with a type of spear made of a piece of wood to which was 
attached a sharp stone. These savages are large, strong and 
7 


--- Page 11 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
handsome, and their faces are much more similar to European 
faces than those of the inhabitants of other islands in Oceania . 
The Marquis islanders 5 are, of all the Kanacs, those who are 
most similar to Easter Islanders. Their color, even though it is 
somewhat coppery, is not very different from that of 
Europeans and quite a large number of them are completely 
white. But initially, and especially from a distance, one does not 
know what to think because all of them, men, women and 
children, have faces and bodies that are painted in a thousand 
different ways and tattooing adds to the strange impression that 
they make. They use a kind of earth or the juice of certain 
plants to decorate themselves in this way - the women only 
color themselves with red dyes, while the men use all colors 
indiscriminately. 
Daniel had decided that the islanders were hostile because he 
had been unable to recognize a single woman in the crowd. But 
he was wrong and it was clear why . At first sight, everyone 
looked the same because everyone was dressed in the same 
way. This "uniform" was very simple . The main item was a 
band of material made of papyrus or some other plant, which 
they fastened with a cord of hair around their hips . A piece of 
the same material, but larger, was thrown over their shoulders 
and tied around their necks by the two ends to complete their 
outfits. This was the usual dress of both men and women and 
explains why, from a distance, one could not tell one from the 
other. There is, however, some difference. The material with 
which the women cover themselves is usually made of some 
kind of straw but men's coverings are made of something else. 
The men let the ends of their "hip bands" hang down but the 
women tie them up . Thus, there were both men and women in 
the crowd on the shore. And it was actually the women that 
Daniel had noticed predominantly since he had told me that 
the savages had their hair in spikes that stuck out perpendicu -
larly from their heads. In fact, it is mainly the women who wear 
their hair in this fashion. 
8 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
I had time to notice these details but there was something else 
that struck me forcefully on my arrival on the island. I looked 
for the Kanacs who had come with me from Tahiti. I found 
them in the middle of the throng and they looked almost as 
uncomfortable as I was. The compatriots of Pana and the 
others hardly seemed to be celebrating their return; they 
seemed keener in getting their hands on their belongings. I 
approached them and told them that the captain planned to 
dock at Anakena in the morning. They paid no attention to 
what I was saying. I repeated myself several times and Pana 
finally replied that we would leave for Anakena as soon as we 
had eaten the potatoes that were in the fire. I was hungry, it's 
true, but I was even keener to get away from this noisy reunion. 
Once we had eaten the potatoes, it was time to set off for 
Anakena. But each time Pana and I tried to escape, someone 
would put his hand on my collar. Tired of fighting a futile 
battle, and without any hope of getting rid of my vigilant 
guardians, I tried to signal the boat that was in the bay. I wave 
my hat, my handkerchief; I shout as loudly as I can but it's a 
wasted effort . We try again to escape, slipping behind a rock, 
but the group that we found there let Pana through but took 
me back into the middle of the crowd. 
It was getting dark, and I had no idea what was going to 
happen, when Pana reappeared with some people who were 
armed with spears. I moved as fast as I could towards them . 
They placed themselves between my guardians and me, to 
cover my retreat, and they suggested that I run as fast as I 
could. I followed their advice. It was 11.00 p.m. when my 
protectors, who had managed to join me, and I stopped and 
went into a cave, where women brought us potatoes. We were 
now able to take a little rest. 
At daybreak, we set off again and reached Anakena. The ship 
was in the bay and came slowly towards us. I tried to signal the 
captain but he seemed not to understand my signals. He tacked 
9 


--- Page 12 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
along the shore and so we had to tack along the shore too, with 
all the natives. We were getting exhausted. Pana wanted to go 
home and I had a problem preventing his departure, while the 
ship sailed out of sight. I retraced my steps and , accompanied by 
several Kanacs, I reached Pana's home before it got dark. 
An Easter Island man wearing a feathered 
headdress. Engraving by J. Caldwall after 
William Hodge s, from Cook, A Voyage 
Towards the South Pole, 1777. 
At this point, I felt deeply 
depressed, seeing myself 
abandoned on this island, 
without any resources, 
and deprived, perhaps for 
a very long time, of the 
ability to speak of our 
Religion to these 
miserable natives . The 
ship had left with all my 
belongings. I could live 
with that - but what was 
an irreparable loss for me 
and the cause of my total 
loss of confidence was 
finding myself deprived 
of the one thing that 
, could have consoled me 
for the loss of everything 
else: my Tahitian 
catechism, which was 
essential for teaching the 
prayers and the main truth s of our Religion to the Kanacs. My 
catechisms and my prayer books were still on the ship; the ship 
had disappeared and was probabl y on its way to Tahiti . 
I was dwelling on these sad facts when Pana arrived with some 
of his people. "Your baggage," he told me, "has been unloaded 
at Anarova and has been taken by people who live over there. 
The captain wants you to go and talk to him there tomorrow." 
"Return to Anarova! That's impossible: my feet have blisters 
10 
The First Missionary to Easter Island-
1864 
and I have twisted my knee. I can't set off again." 
"We'll carry you, if necessary , but you absolutely have to go to 
Anarova tomorrow. I will come with you, but not all the way 
because they're furious with me down there." 
Then he invited me to eat 
sweet potatoes and to 
come into his home for 
the night. 
It was the first time that 
I had been inside a Kanae 
dwelling. And I want to 
tell you about it - which 
won't take long. First of 
all, the furnishings are 
very simple: the dishes 
consist of a calabash for 
carrying water and a little 
bag of plaited straw for 
carrying potatoes. 6 As for 
the bed and the furniture, 
you will understand what 
they might be when I tell 
you about the house 
itself. Think of a mussel 
that is half open that is 
Woman of Easter Island shown with a 
woven hat and large shell. Engraving by J. 
Caldwall after William Hodges, from Cook, 
A Voyage Towards the South Pole, 1777. 
resting on its valve and you will have an idea of the shape of the 
house. A few sticks covered with straw make the framework and 
the roof. An opening like the opening to an oven allows the 
family and their visitors to enter - not on their knees but on 
their stomachs. This entry marks the middle of the building and 
allows enough light in that one can see oneself after one has 
been inside for a few moments. 
You cannot imagine how man y Kanacs find shelter under this 
11 


--- Page 13 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
thatched roof. It is quite warm inside and one is exposed to the 
consequences of the poor hygiene of the islanders and the lack 
of cleanliness of their possessions. One cannot go outside 
without carrying, in one's clothes (if one has any) a large number 
of the inhabitants of the hut . But, at night, when one has no 
other place to shelter, one has to do what everyone else does. So 
one takes one's place, which is assigned to each one by the very 
nature of the hut. The door, being in the middle, establishes an 
axis which divides the hut into two equal parts. People sleep 
lying head to toe alternately, leaving between them enough space 
for others to come and go. One stretches out, thus, across the 
width of the hut, arranging one's limbs as best one can, and one 
tries to sleep. Even though I was very tired, I had a number of 
reasons for not shutting an eye. Thus, I was able to listen at 
leisure to the songs and the weeping that expressed, so I was 
told, the joy of those present. 
At daybreak, the first object that I saw was a little domestic idol, 
to which people appeared not to pay much attention. Alas! It 
was not of such gods that I was inclined to think at that time. I 
started, in front of all those present and with all possible 
solemnity, to pray in the language of the Kanacs. I needed, more 
than ever before, to ask God for strength and for patience . My 
troubles were only just beginning. 
I now had to go back to Anarova and deliver myself into the 
hands of those who had already given me so much trouble. But 
I had to keep going so I set off again on foot, in spite of the 
weariness caused by two days of walking along paths that 
seemed made to especially vex European feet. The island's 
terrain is volcanic, with stones and pointed rocks everywhere . In 
the midst of these stones and the grass that grows all over the 
place, there are only the barest outlines of footpaths that are 
narrower than the sole of a shoe, obliging you to walk with your 
two feet in a single line, without ever being able to put either 
foot flat on the ground. 
12 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
When I arrived in Anarova, I was once again surrounded by a 
noisy crowd that covered the beach, as on my previous visit. 
The captain had unloaded my baggage. Several Kanacs, armed 
with spears, seemed to be guarding my property but they had 
also taken the trouble to appropriate anything that they could lay 
their hands on. One of them was proudly wearing my hat, 
another had managed to put on my coat - everything that had 
not been under lock and key had disappeared. But I still had 
several trunks and the sides of a cabin that I had prepared in 
Tahiti. My most pressing need now was to construct my cabin 
because the protectors of my property seemed keen on 
protecting it from its rightful owner also. The four sides of 
wood attracted the most attention. Some of the people acted as 
if they were parts of a boat, others tried to figure out what they 
were for. I told them that if they would leave me alone, I would 
show everyone what they were. So then they allowed me to 
approach my things . I took a hammer and some nails and began 
to set up the wooden walls. But I had to keep stopping to listen 
to a constant stream of advice, with some in the crowd 
suggesting that I stop and others that I continue . After 
proposing many alternatives, the spectators finally understood 
that the object that had intrigued them to such an extent was a 
house. I had not, of course, been able to choose the site; I had 
had to settle for building my house around my trunks. But when 
the job was complete, I had the satisfaction of seeing my 
belongings locked up and the hope of being able to sleep in my 
own home. 
It was growing dark and finally I could breathe more easily: I 
had a shelter, my belongings had not been stolen, and I had a 
key in my pocket. At that moment, Temanu, one of the Kanacs, 
came with a gift of three chickens. As a result, I made the 
acquaintance of a man with whom I was going to become far 
too involved: my evil genius had appeared in the form of 
Torometi .... At the sight of the chickens, he came up to me and 
asked for them, "to take them off my hands and to have them 
cooked". He did indeed take them off my hands and, during my 
13 


--- Page 14 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
nine months on Easter Island, the buffoon continued, with 
unstinting perseverance, to take off my hands everything that I 
had brought with me but which had by no means been a burden 
tome. 
Torometi is a man of about thirty, tall and strong like the other 
natives of the island. His untrustworthy and surly manner 
inspires caution and justifies his bad reputation. I was told that 
he was not a native of the island - but he was indeed a Kanae, 
having brothers and a large family. I noticed that he lorded it 
over his neighbors. It is hard for me to characterize the 
authority of chiefs on the island. I don't even know the basis for 
such authority. It seems that authority depended only on the 
influence that some natives were able to exert over their 
neighbors and that the people gradually grew accustomed to 
such displays of superiority . In any case, it was clear that 
Torometi was a chief: he was my chief and my neighbor. His 
home was only a few steps from mine but, even so, he did not 
think that was close enough because, at nightfall, he told me to 
open my door, stretched out on my trunks without any 
ceremony, and invited me to go to sleep. He had just taken over 
my lodgings. 
So now I am definitively established in my new homeland. I am 
accepted, I am recognized all over the island, or at least I soon 
will be. My home is going to become the meeting place for all 
those who are curious about me, that is to say, for all the 
islanders. I am the popa;7 the stranger that everyone wants to 
know, that everyone wants to watch as he works, and, in 
particular, that everyone will make an effort to exploit . You can 
already imagine, most Reverend Father, what my life was like on 
Easter Island. T orometi considered me and my belongings to be 
his personal property. Bearing this in mind, he gave me daily my 
ration of cooked sweet potato - he took care to feed me . Thus, 
I was able to devote my days to teaching the natives. That's 
what I did from my arrival to my departure . I barely had more 
than two things to distract me: the work necessary to cultivate a 
14 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
little garden and to sow the vegetable seeds that I had brought 
with me; and the effort required to protect myself from the 
constant interference by Torometi . Apart from this, my stay on 
Easter Island was one long class, a long catechism, interrupted 
only by brief periods of rest and a few little incidents. 
The bell rang three times a day for prayers. 
We gathered together and I pronounced 
each word of a prayer and the natives 
repeated it: we really were praying. Next 
came classes, when the natives repeated the 
prayers and the catechism and I tried to 
teach them to read. In nine months and a 
few days I did not create any scholars but , 
in the end, some Kanacs, as many boys as 
girls, had learned the main prayers pretty 
well, as well as the principal mysteries of our 
Religion. Many had started to spell out 
words and five or six could actually read 
quite well. These results might not appear 
too brilliant but you mustn't forget that 
these poor people hadn't the faintest idea of 
what I was trying to teach them. Moreover, 
their language lacked the words with which 
to describe it. To teach them the prayers, I 
had to learn their language, which was more 
difficult than you can imagine. With 
, savages, there is no way that you can ask a 
question or get some information . The y can 
tell you the name of the object that is in 
Kava kava figure, 
from S. Chauvet , 
1934, Figure 130. 
front of them at that moment, but don't go any further - don't 
ask for the meaning of a word that you don't understand or, in 
particular, for a definition : that is infinitely beyond anything that 
they can understand. All that they will do is reply by repeating 
your question . 
To achieve even these minimal results I had to be at every 
' 
' 
15 


--- Page 15 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
moment of the day, at the disposal of these children, both big 
and little. Ready or not, Professor and Brother Catechist, here 
come the students. They knock on the door. If I come out 
immediately, that's fine; we start our class on the grass opposite 
my cabin. But if I drag my feet or if, believing that I have 
noticed that my pupils are keener to play than to learn, I try to 
send them away until later, they don't miss a beat. After having 
knocked at my door, they knock all around my house, then 
they sit down a little way away and amuse themselves by 
throwing stones at the house, first little ones and then bigger 
ones to keep themselves amused. No matter whether Brother 
Catechist is in a good mood or not, he had better put in an 
appearance . So out I come, armed with my catechism and, 
sitting down on the grass, I say to them, "Come now, gather 
round, we shall learn some prayers." "No," reply the students, 
"You come over here!" The simplest thing is to give in and, 
with everyone squatting on the grass, we repeat the prayers and 
the questions and answers of the catechism, with the pupils 
paying more or less attention. After a little while, some new 
students arrive. Those who get bored first get up and leave; the 
last to arrive hasten to follow them . Soon everyone has left and 
the teacher starts to do something else - but he has to be ready 
to start again whenever the students decide to begin their 
studies once more . If it's hot today, it's tomorrow - so be ready 
because here there is little for the people to do and few 
amusements. They'll be knocking on the door soon, saying, 
"Teach us to pray." 
These good people, in fact, have nothing to do for twelve 
months of the year. One day's work assures them of an 
abundant harvest of sweet potatoes that will last an entire year. 
During the other 364 days, they take walks, they sleep, and they 
go visiting. They also have big gatherings and party continually. 
When a party finishes at one end of the island, another begins 
at the other. The nature of the festivities depends on the 
season. 
16 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
In summer, it is the pazna that attracts the entire population. 
Everyone brings enough food to last through the whole 
celebration, especially for the last day, the day of the banquet. 
All the food, placed in a long line and covered with branches, is 
the centerpiece. When everyone has run around for several days, 
when everyone has, according to the rules of etiquette, gone 
through all the necessary motions, the big day arrives. They 
gobble down the potatoes or sweet potatoes. Then they gather 
all the branches that had covered them and make a kind of 
column or mast, which is called the paina. 
Autumn and winter are the rainy seasons and the nature of the 
festivities changes. Paina is followed by areauti. There is no more 
racing around, no more ritual motions or succulent banquets of 
sweet potatoes. They build large houses at the site of the 
festivities and, by houses, I mean huts that are higher than usual. 
Once these are built, the natives gather in groups, form two 
lines, and sing. What do they sing? Oh! I can assure you that 
their poetry is very primitive and, more especially, very 
monotonous . An event that has really sparked their imagination 
is, in general, the subject of the song. Thus, if a disease has been 
introduced, smallpox, for example, they sing about smallpox. At 
one of the parties, they caught my sheep, roasted them and ate 
them - and then they sang about them, I couldn't tell you how 
often. Don't imagine that they make up poems on these 
occasions. They just repeat the thing over and over again -
sometimes just a single word - and they sing the same thing 
from the beginning to the end of the festivities. 
Spring brings mataveri. 8 They gather on a kind of parade ground. 
The gathering lasts for two months and again they run and 
participate in all possible kinds of exercise . Mataven· is linked to 
paina, which reappears when summer comes. That's the way our 
Kanacs do the best they can to keep themselves amused. 
Naturally, these festivities are an excuse for displays of 
extraordinary finery. Everyone appears with his most precious 
possessions. Thus, some of the outfits are quite eccentric. The 
17 


--- Page 16 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
Kanacs are no longer satisfied with the simple state of undress 
of which I spoke above. They put on everything that they can 
lay their hands on. They paint themselves with greater care than 
usual - taking advantage of 
r,;;::;============;;;;;::, 
the services of artists skilled 
in coloration and the tracing 
of fanciful lines on their 
faces, which has a wondrous 
effect. The women put their 
pendants in their ears. These 
are an extremely curious 
1 invention in terms of the art 
11 of pleasing others. The 
women begin early in the day 
to pierce their earlobes with 
a piece of pointed wood; 
, t-:~
;\_' 
-o-
,
11 
little by little they push the 
,:-t:• :: __ ) . 
-I point in further and further 
2 . .._ 
-~
·- _ ii and the hole g~ts bigger. 
-= "" 
__ 
~ Then they put m the hole a 
u 
/ 
A.,./ 
/ ~
J little role of bark which 
' /·c,
1111011
( a,:, c,;✓1-e cteL~
1
, acting like a spring, exp~nds 
and makes the hole even 
Easter Islander drawn by J. G. St. Sau-
veur, 1806. From S. Chauvet, 1934. 
bigger. After a while, the 
earlobe becomes a slender 
loop that falls onto the shoulder like a ribbon. On feast days, the 
women put an enormous role of bark into each loop - it looks 
quite lovely. Moreover, it is the fashion and here, as elsewhere, 
fashion has the last word . 
On these occasions too, the Kanacs wear an amazing variety of 
head coverings. It is essential to have a hat of some sort -
sometimes it might be a hat decorated with buttons, or even a 
calabash, half a pumpkin, or a seabird whose carcass has been 
split open and has been cleaned to a greater or lesser extent. 
One day, I saw one of these dear Kanacs had had the wit to put 
18 
The First Missionary to Easter Island-1864 
one water pail inside another and wore both jauntily on his 
head. Another, having found a pair of boots left by a Peruvian, 
had split them open, joined them together and literally shod his 
head. Long ago I knew a 
tailor who divided people 
into two classes: people who 
l 
clothe themselves and people 
:, 
:i:: 
:::\!e;:s::e;~l~~~ers 
I 
I 
belong to the latter class. 
1 
They don't care about 
covering themselves to keep 
out the heat or the cold; they 
care about dressing 
themselves. Thus, on their 
important feast days, they 
dress themselves carefully 
and load themselves up with 
anything that they can attach 
to themselves in one way or 
another. A man who has 
been able to lay his hands on 
I 
a dress wears it; if he has two, :i 
he wears them both. A 
woman who has a pair of 
trousers, a jacket and a coat 
wears them all in the most 
Easter Island woman and child, drawn 
by J. G. St. Sauveur, 1806. 
From S. Chauvet, 1934. 
elegant manner. And happy is the one who can add to all this 
luxury something that makes a noise too, such as a piece of 
metal, etc.! My Torometi, who understood these things, had _ 
taken care, early in my stay, to appropriate a little bell that I had 
brought with me. The bell earned him universal applause and 
was the subject of much discussion. 
So that's how they enjoyed themselves. Not everyone would 
agree that their activities were so entertaining - myself for one. 
My Kanacs were very surprised that I expressed neither 
19 
l I 


--- Page 17 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
admiration nor enthusiasm and they could not understand my 
lack of interest . On many other points, our lack of accord was, 
unfortunately, even more apparent. I could never get used to the 
smell of the juice of a certain plant with which they rubbed 
themselves and their clothes. And I could never overcome my 
feelings of repugnance on seeing them catch, with the dexterity 
and skill of a chicken, and then eat the numerous parasitic 
insects that made their homes in the small amounts of material 
with which they covered themselves. 
You would probably like to hear some details of the religion of 
our islanders . As far as I could make out during my nine -month 
stay, religion seems to occupy a very minor place in their lives. 
My imperfect knowledge of their language, it's true, prevented 
me from asking many questions on this subject but, in spite of 
the fact that I lived with them in close proximity, I never 
witnessed any act that was really indicative of a religious cult. In 
each of their homes there were many statuettes, of about thirty 
centimeters in height, that represented a man, a fish, or a bird, 
for example . These are, without a doubt, idols, but I never 
noticed anyone paying particular attention to them. Sometimes I 
saw a Kanae take one of these statuettes, raise it into the air, 
make a few gestures, to the accompaniment of a type of dance 
and some kind of vague chant. What did these gestures mean to 
them? I don't even think they knew the answer themselves. 
They seemed just to be doing what their fathers had done, 
without giving it any more thought. If you ask them what it 
means, they answer, as they do about their games, that it is just a 
custom on the island. 
I also never saw any religious rites after someone had died. 
When an islander is sick, the treatment consists of taking him 
out of the hut in the daytime and putting him back at night. If 
the patient dies, they wrap him up in a shroud of straw, a little 
longer than his body; they tie up the shroud with a piece of 
purau,
9 and they put the whole thing opposite the house, on the 
shore. These bodies, enveloped in their straw shrouds, are 
20 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
placed on a pile of stones or on a type of wooden trestle, with 
the head pointing towards the sea. Since the people are spread 
over the entire island, there are dried out bodies all along the 
coastline, and nobody pays much attention to them. 
I don't know what concept these poor savages have about death 
and the life hereafter. One day, after Torometi had stolen 
something, I tried to talk to him about the life hereafter and the 
fact that he would be called to account for his actions. Pana had 
just died. I reminded him of that and told him that he would do 
the same. I had no idea of the effect that my words would have. 
Immediatel y after I said, ''You will die," Torometi looked as if 
he had been struck by lightning. He started to tremble violently, 
expressing anger and terror . The bystanders did the same. 
Everyone was saying, "Our popa says: E pohe o 'e!"10 It was as if I 
had cast a magic spell. I tried, in vain, to soften the effect of my 
words, repeating that I did not speak their language well, that I 
wished them no harm, but it was useless. Everyone was 
devastated and I was afraid, for a moment, that I might have to 
pay for my rash statement. This state of affairs lasted for more 
than two weeks. Everyone knew that I had said, ''You will die," 
and for a long time I was treated as if I had committed a terrible 
crime. I realized that the words that I had spoken had been 
taken as a threat or as a prediction of a great disaster. Thus, I 
advise all those who go to Easter Island to never say, in front of 
the natives, "E pohe o 'e." 
This incident made me think, moreover, that superstition s were 
not unknown on Easter Island and that Torometi had been 
afraid that I had cast a spell on him. However , nothing 
. 
happened to support this possibility and I don't think that such 
ideas are responsible for the things that I am going to report. 
In all the homes there were wooden tablets covered with many 
types of hieroglyphic characters, which are symbols of animals 
that do not exist on the island and which the natives incise with 
a sharp stone . Each symbol has a name but the minimal fuss 
that the natives make of these tablets leads me to believe that 
21 


--- Page 18 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
these symbols, the remains of a primitive writing system, 
represent a custom that they continue to practice without trying 
to recall its meaning . 
The Kanacs don't know how to read or write but they are very 
good at counting , having words for all the numbers . They 
measure time according to a lunar year. But even there they 
seem to have forgotten the details and they disagree about the 
number of lunar cycles. And here's something noteworth y. 
These savages are very interested in everything related to these 
issues. When I spoke of months, the sunrise and other such 
things, everyone would gather round and even the old people 
would take their places among the school children . There was 
the same interest whenever I spoke about written correspon-
dence. One day, while I was holding a class, I saw a ship in the 
distance. Hoping that it might land on the island, I went into my 
hut to write a few lines. My pupils watched attentively from a 
distance. The y thought that I could talk to people who were 
very far away and that I was doing so in my hut. They asked my 
about my conversation with the people on the ship. 
Should I speak of the industriousness of these good Kanacs? 
Their needs are so limited that they have little ambition . It is 
quite natural for them to be idle and carefree. Nonetheless, they 
are quite skilled. They braid straw adroitly and work adeptly with 
thread, with which they make belts, nets, etc. The thread is 
pulled from the fibrous tissues of the piirau. The bark of the 
maute11, beaten and stretched, furnishes the material with which 
they cover their shoulders. Their tools are just their fingers and 
any stone that they pick up . The y don't know how to use 
European tools. If they have to trim their beards, they take a 
sharp stone. They would use a stone to cut thread even if there 
was a pair of scissors at hand . Above all, they love to sew. One 
can give them great pleasure by giving them a gift of a few 
pieces of fabric with which to patch their cloaks, which soon 
begin to look like a harlequin costume. 
22 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
Agriculture , as I have noted already, requires no great effort . 
The soil is fertile, if stony, and the regular rains and temperate 
climate seem to render this little island suitable for all kinds of 
plants . My attempts were relatively minimal. The few vegetable 
seeds that I sowed did yield a crop . All the plants that I brought 
with me seemed to become acclimatized but some of them were 
stolen by T orometi, who let them dry out before he tried to 
plant them. The tiny plot that I tried to cultivate disappeared 
little by little, destro yed by my neighbors and the children. 
Nonetheless, my efforts did demonstrate that it should be 
Ag, 161 
Ron goron go bo ard from S. Chauvet, 1934: Figur e 161. 
possible to grow all crops found at the middle latitudes. The 
Kanacs don't need so many things . And agriculture, like 
everything else, is still at the embryonic stage. When it is time to 
plant sweet potatoes, they use a pointed stick to make little holes 
in the ground, they put in the potato eyes, and that's it. if they 
are planting a vine, they push a little pile of dirt around a 
seedling and rely for further assistance on Providence. It never 
occurs to them to till the dirt or to water their plants. Thus , 
nature leaves little for these fortunate islanders to do. However, 
they still have to cook. But here too there is little that is 
· 
complex. It does not take much to cook the eternal sweet 
potatoes . That's what they eat every day, the invariable everyday 
meal of the Kanacs , both young and old. There are indeed a few 
chickens and, very occasionally, someone catches a fish but 
these tasty delicacies are shared only by a few privileged people. 
23 


--- Page 19 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
The wife and children, when the husband has eaten, might 
perhaps suck on some bones, which have already been sucked 
free of flesh once and even twice. Apart from these exceptions, 
there is perfect uniformity: always sweet potatoes, everywhere 
sweet potatoes, cooked in the Polynesian manner here , as on all 
the islands, by steaming in a hole in the ground, with heated 
stones. However, the Kanacs do this very skillfully and could 
certainly teach us something. 
I have noticed that the Kanacs are very careful not to spill 
blood . They strangle chickens . One day, I was using my knife to 
kill a chicken and a woman who saw me almost passed out . To 
kill dogs and goats, they dig a hole of the desired size and bury 
the animal's head . When the animal has suffocated, they take 
out the animal, singe its skin, and then, without further ado , they 
earth 
COYel" 
l"etaining 
stones 
fil"e heated 
stones 
Sketch by G. Lee of an earth oven, ttmu, top view (left) and profile (right). 
put the bod y into the regular oven with the sweet potatoes. I 
believe that the sight of human blood is similarly repugnant to 
the Kanacs . Even though they have had knives since the arrival 
of the Peruvians, they never use them in their feuds . If they 
want to send someone into the next world, they find it simpler 
to use stones. Thus, when Torometi was displeased with his 
meal, he literally stoned his wife so brutally that the poor 
creature was unable to move the next day. 
All that is left to tell you now, Most Reverend Father, is about 
the purely personal adventures that I had . And I have decided to 
24 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
tell you about them to give you a more exact idea of the morals 
of the island. These little incidents are not very varied because, 
at bottom, they all involve my efforts to prevent myself from 
being robbed of everything or, at least, of everything all at once . 
Torometi, of course, wanted to steal everything as soon as 
possible and, while I tried to drag out the entire process, my 
host took advantage of every occasion to make a renewed 
assault on my property. Torometi had a very bad reputation, 
which seemed well justified to me . Nonetheless, I have the 
impression that , had I fallen into other hands, I would not have 
been better treated . All the Kanacs accuse each other of theft... 
and all the accusations are true . If there are some who steal less 
than others, it's only because they lack the chance or the nerve. 
Immediatel y after I landed, Torometi , who considered himself 
the owner of everything that I had brought with me, started to 
appropriate everything that I had not locked away. The next day, 
I had to open all my trunks in front of him, show him 
everything that they contained, and explain the purpose of every 
object. Unfortunately, he was not satisfied with just looking at 
things. He saw a little axe and immediately took it. That was the 
subject of our first argument; I resisted as much as I could but I 
was unable to take it from him. There was only this single axe 
on the entire island and he was very keen to acquire it. "And 
anyway," he said, "I'll lend it to you when you need it." So I had 
to resign myself to the loss of my axe. Torometi was never 
without this weapon and he used it to induce me to give him 
everything that he coveted during the course of my stay. During 
his first inspection of my belongings, another thing that 
intrigued him was my bell. I had an enormous amount of 
trouble keeping it and placing it above my cabin . The gifts of 
nature, with which my guardian absconded, grew up one more 
time during my stay on the island . 
You might find it strange that I was so accommodating. Indeed , 
I did offer a little resistance but, in the end, I felt that it was 
prudent not to let things go too far. The natives don't often 
resort to violence. I have seen them have noisy arguments and 
25 


--- Page 20 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
burn down each other's huts but without, nevertheless, coming 
to blows. I am no less convinced that, if Torometi had gotten 
really irritated, he would have had a way of taking care of me. 
Moreover, T orometi was not alone - I was dealing with the 
entire population of the island and, when I was feeling better 
and I made a greater effort, I achieved no better results . If I 
closed my door to this unwelcome scrounger, he would go and 
sit some fifty paces from my hut, and soon his wife, his 
neighbors and the anyone in the neighborhood would sit down 
with him and they would begin to make a terrible row. They 
would throw stones and make me see quite clearly that it would 
be better for me to surrender the object that Torometi coveted 
than to let them demolish my home or to wait until they set it 
on fire. 
Meanwhile, I needed a chapel. I worked on this project during 
the few free moments that I had when I was not teaching 
prayers or catechism. There was not much to choose from in 
terms of construction materials; all I had at my disposal was 
earth mixed with straw and dried in the sun. It was summertime . 
I had to be satisfied with seawater for moistening the earth and 
with dried grass instead of straw. In spite of everything, I would 
have been able to build something passable had I not been 
interrupted by the winter rains and if I had had more scrupulous 
neighbors . In vain, I cut grass and left it to dry: T orometi had 
discovered that there was nothing better for his kitchen fire and 
I had to start over every day. 
In three months, all that I managed to achieve was the 
beginnings of a chapel, eight meters long and four meters wide, 
with walls that were barely 130 centimeters high. The rains 
prevented me from continuing and Torometi, whom I had 
asked to help me, told me quite clearly that he did not want a 
mud house. So I abandoned my work as a mason and 
concentrated on teaching the catechism exclusively. 
Soon I took upon myself the task of visiting the entire island. 
26 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
My intention was to visit the principal sites and to teach the 
natives at each site in succession. When I told Torometi of my 
plans, he seemed against them initially but then appeared to 
approve of my departure. Once I had reached Temana12, I 
started to teach the catechism and to congratulate myself on the 
good mood of my hosts. But, then, one fine day, I was told that 
Torometi had taken advantage of my absence to move 
everything out of my house. I set off again for Anakena, 
accompanied by a group of Kanacs . When he saw me, Torometi 
appeared most surprised. He said that he would have been 
unable to cause me the slightest harm. According to his account, 
it was the wind that had blown open my shutters and had 
caused the disappearance of a large nwnber of items from my 
hut . 
The results of my first excursion made me delay a second one 
for a while. Moreover, it was wintertime and, even though the 
winter weather is relatively mild, it is still felt by people who 
wear as little as our Kanacs . The rain does not last very long but 
it does rain frequentl y and sometimes the wind is strong enough 
to whip up a high sea that prevents anyone from landing on the 
shore for a week or two at a time. At such a time, my Kanacs 
had a new idea. The y got the idea into their heads that I should 
build a boat. There was no point my protesting that I knew 
nothing about such things - my protestations went unheeded . 
They thought that I knew everything and could do everything, 
even build a boat without wood and tools . I was in a pretty 
tricky situation . I have already told you how they carried on 
when they were determined to get something from me. So they 
began to make another ruckus . ''You want wood," they shouted, 
''We have lots of wood." And they ran all over the island, 
gathering all the bits of planks, all the pieces of wood - straight, 
bent or rotten - that they could find. This boat was going to be 
the result of national cooperation . On other occasions, I had 
noted this custom of making everyone contribute to a project 
that was considered important. Nobody would think of not 
participating . There is no need for me to add that I also had to 
27 


--- Page 21 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
sacrifice some of the wood that I had . Then, with so many fine 
contributions, it would have been rude of me to refuse, any 
longer, to get to work as carpenter and boat builder. I ceased to 
resist and, at the end of two weeks, my impatient Kanacs were 
able to see something that resembled a boat. Ah! These two 
weeks had seemed such a long time to them and they had barely 
allowed me the time to eat. 
The assemblage of all these pieces of wood left something to be 
desired and, in addition, it was also necessary to make the craft 
watertight. I announced that this final task was their business 
and, since they indicated that they had a type of clay that would 
make a good seal, they set to work. I was only afraid of one 
thing and that was being chosen to take command of this new 
and dangerous vessel. That same day, and before the seal had 
time to dry, they wanted to launch it. So I shut myself in my hut. 
But they were determined to complete the festivities 
appropriately. Recalling that the vessels that had sometimes 
sailed to the island had been manned by sailors in shirts and 
trousers, they dreamed up the idea of getting all dressed up too. 
Of course, I had to provide their costumes . One of them, Teoni, 
had the nerve to go into my hut and steal my trousers. Pushed 
to the limit, I seized the thief by the arm and threw him out of 
the door. I had not noticed that he was carrying an axe and I 
was wounded in the arm. The copious flow of blood horrified 
the Kanacs, and Teoni gave up his quest for trousers . I went 
back into my hut and watched the launching of the boat. 
Dragged brutally across the stones, it reached the water's edge in 
no time. Now what would happen? Everyone wanted to 
participate and to contribute to the long-anticipated launching. 
But, alas, their joy was short -lived. As the boat entered the 
water, so water entered the boat - and soon it was full. It was 
impossible to proceed further. Farewell, boat rides and 
expeditlons. Gone were the dreams of our good native islanders. 
They would have to find other ways to amuse themselves and, 
indeed, they did not lack for entertainment. 
28 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
Mataveri was approaching and everyone was a little excited. 
Torometi's behavior was even more outrageous than before. He 
asked me for all the rest of my belongings, "to hide them 
because someone is planning to steal them." Since these fine 
fellows are so suspicious of one another, and with good reason, 
they are always on the alert to defend and to hide the little that 
they have . And hiding places abound. There are deep caves, 
some natural and some artificial, all over the island, and they 
have very narrow entrances. Only a few stones are needed to 
cover and hide each entrance. At any given moment, the entire 
population of the island could disappear, hiding in these caves. 
T orometi proposed to put my belongings in one such cave to 
keep them safe. I refused outright. But Torometi, his brother 
and his wife, with neighbors as reinforcements, set upon me and 
I was unable to resist. They took my keys, gathered up all my 
possessions, leaving me only my mattress and the boxes for my 
tools. Once the operation was complete, they returned my keys. 
Nothing like this had happened to me before. Without a doubt, 
Torometi had often arranged things so that he could extort 
some coveted object from me. He had begged me and 
threatened me but he had never actually resorted to violence. 
The last barrier had fallen and it seemed that henceforth I would 
have to fear for my life. The only thing to do was to extract 
myself from the grip of this tyrant by running away. But, until 
now, I had never managed to get away without him stopping me 
or going through my luggage and I had to beg him repeatedly 
for permission to go and baptize Pana and three or four others 
who had begged for this benediction. Thus, I waited for a 
favorable moment to escape the vigilance of my Cerberus - and 
soon such a moment arrived. 
Some Kanacs from Anapika 13 came to carry my few belongings 
and I set off with them, in spite ofTorometi's arrival just as we 
were leaving. The people of Anapika were well disposed 
towards popa because, of course, they planned to rob him in 
their turn. I had hardly had a moment's rest in Anapika when 
Torometi showed up with some islanders: they had come 
29 


--- Page 22 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
looking for me. I did not want to go with them and there was 
another long struggle. In the end, they knocked me down, 
grabbed me by the arms and legs, and set off again. They had 
the patience to carry me in this way for about two kilometers 
but they were not very gentle and I felt almost tom in two. I 
told them that I wanted to spare them the trouble of carrying 
me further and they set me on the ground . They returned my 
shoes and I finished the journe y with them on foot . 
A surprise awaited me. Torometi had put back into my hut most 
of the things that he had taken from me a few days earlier. 
"You thought that I was a thief but here is what was missing. I 
simply wanted to put everything in a safe place. The real thieves 
are the people that you went to see. You will soon understand 
that because you can give up any hope of seeing what you took 
with you again: everything is gone. Go back now to those 
people who don't even have a single sweet potato for you to 
eat." 
I was quite confused, as much by the failure of my scheme as by 
the mistake that I had made . I understood that Torometi had 
been right when he told me that I would never again see the 
things that I had taken with me and that the other K.anacs were 
not any better than he was. A week later, I went looking for my 
trunks. Alas, Torometi's words had been true to the letter: I was 
able to bring back nothing except damaged and empty trunks . 
More was about to happen. It was September and mataveri 
brought together a large part of the population about six or 
eight kilometers from our home territory . Torometi was clearly 
focused on this reunion and expected that it would bring about 
the coup that he had been expecting for some time . One of the 
K.anacs, Tamateka, had, in fact, let me know that Torometi was 
hated by everyone and that his misdeeds would bring him an 
exemplary punishment. 
One morning, I saw Tamateka arrive, followed by a crowd of 
people who gathered in front ofTorometi's 
hut . Everyone was 
30 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
talking at once, the discussion became heated and, even though 
I never understand any of these arguments, it was easy to see 
that things were going to end badly. I came out of my hut and 
sat down a little distance away. Torometi, on his side, had come 
out of his hut but was barely participating in the discussion. I 
really wanted to get away from all the fuss but I was keen not to 
lose sight of my hut and I wanted to keep an eye on the crowd 
too . Soon things began to get quite threatening. A few brave 
souls approached Torometi's hut, tore at the straw that covered 
it, and tried to tip it over. Immediately, it burst into flames. It 
was windy and the fire was over in several minutes. T orometi 
had remained impassive, sitting beside the fire. One of his 
friends had to take him by the hand to pull him away from the 
fire, which was about to reach him. I was afraid that my hut 
might suffer the same fate but , I am happy to say, there was no 
attempt to attack it. In fact, a few I<:anacs, armed with spears, set 
themselves up as guards all around it. 
When there was nothing left of Torometi's house, the crowd, 
seeing the famous boat that I had built tried, in vain, to destro y 
it too. At that moment, Torometi, surrounded by a few 
partisans, tried to distance himself from the scene of his 
misfortunes. Now, instead of being just a spectator, I found 
myself involved. Torometi wanted me to go with him but his 
enemies had the opposite idea . However, recalling the futility of 
my previous attempts to separate myself from Torometi, I 
decided to follow him . 
We set off in the direction of the mataveri festivities. A dense and 
excited crowd came with us and the discussions continued . I 
was in the center of the throng, hemmed in on all sides and 
deafened by so much noise . My tum had come . Suddenly; I felt 
my hat being taken and, at the same time, several pairs of hands 
removed my overcoat, my waistcoat and my shoes, which were 
soon in tatters . I found myself dressed pretty much like my 
neighbors . When I was able to glance around, I saw the thieves 
wearing their spoils: one was wearing my hat, others the remains 
31 


--- Page 23 ---
Eugene Eyraud 
of my overcoat and those who had taken my catechism and 
prayer books were looking for ways to include these in their 
outfits. Our progress was not interrupted by these event~; I set 
off again like the others. We arrived at another hut that was to 
be set on fire but there was no general agreement and little by 
little the crowd dispersed. I thought I was at the end of my 
peregrinations and, in spite of all the emotions that I had 
experienced, I consoled myself with the thought of spending the 
night there. But Torometi wanted to return to my hut - he 
wanted to recover some of the things that had been left there. 
So we had to set off again. It was dark and I scratched my feet 
with every step . It was certainly the worst part of the entire day. 
When we arrived at my hut, I did not have the key since it had 
been taken with my clothes. I went in via the roof and passed to 
Torometi the things that he wanted. For myself, I was happy to 
put on an old pair of shoes and, draped Roman style in an old 
coverlet, I set off again with Torometi on the path to Anapika, 
where his brother lived. We spent the rest of the night there. 
The next day my companion, who was still worried, thought of 
moving still further away and led me to V ainu, twelve kilometers 
further on. Subsequent events proved him right. We learned that 
his brother's house, where we had stayed in Anapika, had been 
burned down. 
In V ainu, I found sweeter and more docile people, who were 
keener to learn than those everywhere else. I set to work 
teaching the catechism with fresh enthusiasm. Barely a week had 
passed when the children in the class shouted that there was a 
black dot on the horizon, "A ship!" It really was a ship and it 
was aiming for the island. I watched it for a little while but, 
seeing it head south, I figured that it must be going to do the 
same as the other four or five ships that I had glimpsed over the 
past nine months. Night fell and the ship was no longer visible. 
I went to bed without giving it any further thought. 
The next day, at about eight o'clock in the morning, a child 
came and told me that there was a ship at Anarova and that 
32 
The First Missionary to Easter Island - 1864 
Torometi was asking for me. I set off without breakfast and met 
T orometi as he was coming to meet me. The ship was tacking 
towards the shore. Seeing the French flag, I reassured the 
K.anacs who were afraid that the ship might be manned by 
pirates. We followed the ship's movements along the shore and 
saw a small boat being let down into the water. Torometi, 
without waiting any longer, took me on his shoulders and 
carried me to the boat, where I fell into the arms of Father 
Barnabe. A moment later, we were aboard the Teresa Ramos. 
Father Barnabe will tell you the details of his voyage to Easter 
Island. As for me, when the decision is made definitively to 
establish a mission on the island, I might be able to give some 
useful advice to those to whom this task is assigned. 
In the meantime, please be assured, Very Reverend Father, of 
my deepest respect and my total devotion to the Order of the 
Sacred Hearts. 
Brother Eugene Eyraud 
Endnotes 
1 Kanaka was a term for native islander, used in early days. It actually means 
"man" in the Hawaiian language, but came to refer to any Polynesian. 
2 Father Olivier's letter was originally published inAnnales de la Propagation de 
la Foi ("Annals of the Propagation of the Faith"), 38:45-52, 1866. 
3 Brother Eugene's letter was published in the same volume, :52-71, 124-138. 
4 An archipelago 1,600 km southeast of Tahiti, the largest island of which is 
Mangareva. 
s Marquesas Islanders 
6 The reference is to sweet potatoes . 
7 Popa'd is Tahitian for a stranger of a white race. 
8 Mataveri refers to the area south of Hangaroa village; it also is used here as 
the place where the birdman festivities began. 
9 Rope made from the bark of the Hibiscus. Piirau is the Tahitian term for 
Hibiscus, used here by Eyraud. 
10 E pohe o'e is Tahitian for "dying of hunger" . 
11 Mahute. 
12 The location of this village has not been determined . ~e 
other place 
names are similar to those of today, Temana remains unknown. 
13 This was probably Hanga Piko, just to the south of Hangaroa village. 
33 

