--- Page 1 ---
• 
Hippolyte Roussel 
around 30 cm in length. 
24 We should not interpret the phrase "household gods" to mean that 
these statuettes were actual idols . To date, nobody has been able 
to prove that they were ever the focus of a religious cult and thus 
remain full of mystery for ethnographers. In addition to the giant 
stone statues, the Rapanui also had wooden statuettes, carved in 
greater detail. The ribs and backbones were exaggerated and faces 
carved in a grimace . These were shown off at festive gatherings, 
together with other curiosities sculpted by their artists. 
25 We suspect that the reason these two word s are in italics is that they were 
inadvertently transposed. The text would make more sense if the auth or 
said that he believed that the statues were rolled rather than dragged, if 
"rolled" were interpr eted as "moved on rollers". 
26 The sheep did, eventu ally, become acclimated and mad e up the major 
product of the count ry by 1926. 
27 An Apo stolic Vicar is a special delegate sent from Rom e, in lieu of a 
Bishop . 
Refer enc es 
Chauvet, Steph en, 1934. L 'ile de Paques et ses Mysteres. E ditions "Tel", Paris. 
Thomson, W. J. 1891. Te Pito Te Henua, or Easter Island. Rep ort of the United 
States Na tional Museum for the year endin g June 30, 1889. Annu al Re-
ports of the Smith sonian In stitution for 1889. Washington . pp. 447-552. 
Routledge, Katherine. 1919. The Mystery of Easter Island. Haze ll, Watson and 
Viney, London . 
60 
DiBPlZ of a Ga4ot 
OR tho WaPship ha FIOP8 
A sketch by Pierre Loti of the statues on the side of Rano Rarah."U. 
From S. Chauvet, 1934, Figure 53. 


--- Page 2 ---
Pierre Loci 
62 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
Diary of a Cadet 
on the Warship La Flore -1872 
by Pierre Loti 
Easter Island 
I 
n the middle of the 
Pacific Ocean, where 
sailors never go, there is 
an isolated and mysteri-
ous island; there are no 
other islands nearby and 
the island is surrounded 
by vast and empty rolling 
seas for more than eight 
hundred leagues 1 in 
every direction . The is-
land is planted with mon -
strous tall statues, carved 
by an unknown race of 
people that has either dis-
appeared or dispersed, 
and its history remains an 
erugma. 
I arrived there by a three-
masted frigate long ago, 
in my early youth, after 
Julien Viaud (Pierre Loti.). Photo taken June 
20, 1878 in Brest. © Rochefort-Maison de 
Pierre Loti.. 
days of high winds and murky clouds. All that remains to me 
now is the memory of a wondrous dreamlike island. 
As a naval cadet, I kept a daily record of my experiences in a 
63 


--- Page 3 ---
Pierre Loci 
somewhat confused and childish diary. This account is a modi-
fied version of that diary, to which I have tried to add some de-
tails that were missing. 
January 3 
At eight o'clock in the morning, the lookout sighted land and I 
caught my first glimpse of the silhouette of Easter Island, to the 
Northeast. The island was still far away and we did not reach it 
until evening in spite of the favorable trade winds. 
Several days previously, we had abandoned the standard sea 
lanes that ships follow across the Pacific in order to sail to the 
island, which is on nobod y's route to anywhere . It was discov-
ered by chance and the few navigators who had, on very rare oc-
casions, visited the island, told contradictory stories about it. 
The islanders, whose origins are shrouded in perplexing mystery, 
are dying out little by little, for unknown reasons, and there re-
main, we were told, only a few dozen starving and timorous sav-
ages who survive on a diet of roots. In the midst of the solitude 
of the seas, the island will soon find itself alone too, with the gi-
ant statues as its only guardians. There is nothing there, not even 
a spring from which to collect fresh water, and attempts to land 
there are hampered by breakers and numerous reefs. 
We are going to the island to explore and to take away with us, 
if possible, one of the ancient stone statues, which our admiral 
would like to bring back to France . 
Slowly this strange island comes closer and we can see it more 
clearly; under a sky darkened by clouds, we see reddish craters 
and dark rocks. A great wind is blowing and the sea is covered 
with white spray. 
Rapa Nui is the name by which the natives refer to Easter Is-
land - and in the very sound of that name I hear echoes of sad-
ness, savagery, and the darkness of night .... The darkness of 
64 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
time, the darkness of the island's origins or the darkness of the 
sky - it is unclear what kind of darkness is implied but it is clear 
that the black clouds, in whose shadows the island lies before 
us, reflect the darkness that captures my imagination.2 
Finally, at four o'clock in the afternoon , in the shelter of the bay 
in which Cook dropped anchor so long ago, our frigate furls her 
sails and drops her anchors. Then canoes set sail from the shore 
and come towards us in the untamed wind. 
Here comes a kind of whaling vessel, bringing us someone who 
looks like a European! The sight of a gentleman in a hat and 
overcoat, just as we are landing on Rapa Nui, is both disconcert-
ing and disappointing. 
The visitor comes on board: he is an old Dane ,3 and quite unex-
pected. Three years ago, he tells us, one of the Tahitian vessels 
that take mother of pearl and pearls to America made a detour 
of two hundred leagues to deposit him on the island. And, since 
that time, this old adventurer has been living alone, with the na-
tives, as far from our world as someone who has chosen to live 
on the moon. An American planter had instructed him to accli-
mate yams and sweet potatoes to the island climate, with the 
aim of establishing huge plantations in the future. But nothing is 
going right, nothing is growing and the savages refuse to do any 
work. There are still three or four hundred of them, the old man 
tells us, gathered in the neighborhood of the very bay in which 
we dropped anchor, while the rest of the island is basically de-
serted. He, the Dane, lives in a stone house that he found on his 
arrival and whose roof he fixed; it used to be the home of the 
French missionaries. There had been missionaries on Rapa Nui 
for several years but they went away or died - it is unclear ex-
actly what happened - leaving the people to return to the wor-
ship of fetishes and idols. 
While the Dane and I are talking, I hear something jump onto 
the deck behind me. When I turn around, I see that one of the 
65 


--- Page 4 ---
Pierre Lori 
" 
oarsmen from the Dane's boat, a young savage, had been impu-
dent enough to jump on board our ship. Oh! What a startling 
thin face, with a small nose shaped like a falcon's beak and large, 
sad eyes that are too close together. He is naked, simultaneously 
slender and muscular; his skin is a coppery red and decorated 
with blue tattoos , and his hair, which is also red, is tied with 
plant stems on the top of his head to form a topknot that the 
wind ruffles so that resembles a flame. He stares at us with be-
wildered eyes, with the charm of a crazy little devil. 
"And the statues?" we ask our old Danish Crusoe. 
Drawing of a native canoe by Masselot from Dupetit-Thouars , 1846. 
From S. Chauvet 1934, Figure 18. 
Ah! The statues? There are two kinds. First, those at the beach, 
which have all been knocked over and broken; we shall find 
some of them nearby, around the bay. And then there are the 
others, the scary ones, from a different era and with different 
faces, which are still standing over there, far away, at the other 
end of the island, in the depths of undisturbed solitude. 
The savage with the red topknot starts to feel more confidant. 
Now he is dancing and singing to amuse us. He is one of the na-
tives that the missionaries baptized and his name is Petero. The 
wind, which is getting stronger as dusk falls, carries off his mel-
ancholy song and blows his topknot around. 
The other natives are afraid and do not want to come on board. 
66 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
However, their canoes surround us, rocked by their oars, the 
white capped waves and the spray. Pointing to their naked 
limbs, they make signs to indicate that they want clothes from 
the sailors in exchange for their paddles, their spears and their 
wooden and stone idols. The entire population has come to see 
us and all are naively overexcited by our arrival. However, the 
water in the bay is getting rougher and night is falling. 
January4 
It is five o'clock in the morning and day is starting to break un-
der thick gray clouds. A whaling boat, which has been assigned 
to me, is carrying me and two other cadets, friends of mine, who 
are as anxious as I am to set foot on this strange island. The ad-
miral, who was amused by our impatience, has given each of us 
various tasks: to find a suitable channel and a site at which the 
crew can disembark; to look for the great statues; and to kill 
some rabbits for his dinner! 
It is cold and dark. The wind is up and violent gusts throw 
handfuls of salty spray into our faces. To receive us this morn-
ing, the island has taken on a most fantastic appearance; the 
rocks and craters have a pale coppery tint against the dark gray 
background of the sky. And there is not a single tree anywhere -
the island is as desolate as a desert . 
Without too much trouble, we find a passage between the 
breakers, which are making sinister loud rumblings this morn-
ing. Once we have crossed the belt of reefs and reached calmer 
waters, we catch sight of Petero, our friend from the previous 
evening, who is standing on a rock and calling us. His shouts 
wake everyone else up and, in a flash, the entire shore is covered 
with savages. They come out from all over the place, from crev-
ices in the rocks where they were sleeping and from huts that 
are so low that they seem incapable of accommodating human 
beings. From a distance, we had failed to notice these thatched 
huts but there they are, in large numbers, lying flat on the 
ground, which is the same color as they are. 
67 


--- Page 5 ---
Pierre Loci 
When we have disembarked at the spot that Petero pointed out 
to us, all the men surround us, waving their lances with flint 
tips, their oars and their ancient idols in the half-light of the 
early morning. And the loud cold wind picks up, while the 
clouds seem to drag along the ground. 
The whaling boat that has brought us to land returns to the frig-
ate, as ordered by the captain. My two friends, who have guns, 
go off along the beach towards a place where there are rabbits, 
according to the Dane last night. I remain alone, watched from 
shorter and shorter distances by my new hosts . There are chests 
and faces colored blue with tattoos, long hair, strange smiles 
with white teeth, and sad eyes whose whites seem all the more 
brilliant because of the drawings in dark blue beneath them . In 
my light clothes, which are wet from the salt spray, I begin to 
shiver from the cold and I note that daylight seems to be taking 
its time to emerge from under the thick clouds this morning .... 
The natives form a circle around me and each of them offers me 
his lance or his idol. Now some of them start to sing, quietly at 
first, a sort of plaintive and lugubrious chant, which they accom -
pany by swaying their hips and shaking their heads like great 
dancing bears .... I know that they are harmless and, moreover, 
their faces, which on first impression appear fierce because of 
their tattoos, have a childlike sweetness. The y do not make me 
feel afraid in any rational way; nevertheless, since I find myself 
for the first time in my life on an island in the Pacific Ocean, I 
do feel a shudder of surprise and instinctive fear with all these 
eyes upon me and all this breathing so close to me, before day-
break, on a deserted shore, under dark clouds .... 
Now the rhythm of the song is accelerating, as are the move-
ments of the heads and hips; the voices are becoming hoarse 
and deep, turning into a loud and savage roar that leads into a 
furious dance accompanied by the wild wind and the noise of 
the sea. 
68 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
And then, suddenly, the singing and dancing cease. It's over. 
The circle opens up and the dancers disperse .... What did they 
all want from me? Was it some kind of childish demonstration 
on their part, or an exorcism, or was it just a warm welcome ... ? 
Who knows ... ? 
An old man, covered with tattoos, who is wearing a headdress 
of long black feathers and who is probabl y some kind of chief, 
takes one of my hands and Petero takes the other. They run be-
side me, pulling me along, with the crowd behind us. 
We stop in front of one of th~ many thatched dwellings that are 
flattened among the rocks and the sand, where they resemble 
the backs of sleeping animals. My escorts invite me to go inside 
and I have to get down on my hands and knees, wriggling like a 
cat going through a cat-door, because the entrance, at ground 
level and guarded by two granite divinities with sinister expres-
sions, is a round hole that is barely two feet high. 
Inside the hut, which smells like an animal's den, it is impossible 
to see anything, in particular because of the crowd of people 
milling around and their shadows; of course, it is also impossible 
Chiefs house in 1872 according to Pierre Loti. A person is shown crawling 
through the doorwa y and into the house. Note small statues at the doorwa y 
and tattooed islanders. 
© Fonds Daniel Herve, Maison de Pierre Loti, Rochefort. 
69 


--- Page 6 ---
Pierre Loti 
to stand up and, after the fresh and invigorating breeze outside, 
the air is barely breathable. 
I am invited to sit down on mats beside the "chiefess" and her 
daughter; they have no gifts for me and they apologize for the 
absence of gifts by making appropriate gestures. Now my eyes 
are getting used to the light inside the hut and I can see cats and 
rabbits moving around us. 
During the course of the morning, I have to make many similar 
visits to placate all the important people 
on the island, and I crawl into innumer-
able darkened dwellings - where the 
crowd follows me and embraces me in 
a confusion of chests and hips, naked 
and tattooed. Little by little, I become 
impregnated with the odor of a wild 
man and a savage. 
Everyone wants to give me an idol, a 
club or a spear in exchange for a piece 
of my clothing or something else that 
catches their fancy. Money obviously 
means nothing to them; it's best for 
decorating necklaces but glass pearls 
create a much handsomer effect. 
Finally, it is well and truly daytime and, 
on all sides, the curtains of clouds disin-
tegrate. Then the views change and the 
island, under a brighter light, seems 
more "real" and less sinister and, in any 
case, I am getting used to it. 
Head of an ua. 
From S. Chauvet 1934, 
Figure 103b. 
Already, to make some purchases, I have parted with the entire 
contents of my pockets: my handkerchief, some matches, a 
notebook and a pencil. I decide to give away my cadet's jacket in 
70 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
exchange for an extraordinary club that is topped by a kind of 
Janus head with a double human face - and so I continue my 
expedition in shirtsleeves. 
I have obviously landed in the middle of a race of children. The 
young and the old cannot get enough of me. They want to 
watch me, listen to me, and follow me with all my various acqui-
sitions, my idols and my weapons, all the while singing their 
plaintive dirges. 
Indeed, when one thinks about it, what an event it must be for 
these people to have visitors like us on their isolated island, 
from which they see, on average, only a single sail every ten 
years or so on the infinity of sea that surrounds them! 
In addition to my many escorts 
that hang back a little bit, I have 
also made five special friends: 
Petero, first of all; then two young 
boys, Atamou and Houga; and 
two girls, Marie and Iouaritai:. 
Both Marie and Iouaritai: are com-
pletely naked apart from a belt 
... f 
that covers the bare essentials; 
/"/ -
their bodies would have been al-
most white, without any touch of 
sun or sea, were it not for the 
faint reflection of a coppery red, 
which is typical of the race. Their 
legs and thighs are covered with 
long blue tattoos, in strange pat-
terns that have been exquisitely 
executed, no doubt to accentuate 
their charming slenderness. Marie 
was baptized as a child by the mis-
sionaries and it is quite disconcert-
71 
Woman of Rapa Nui, drawn by 
Radiguet, from Dupetit-Thouars, 
1841. S. Chauvet 1934, Figure 11. 


--- Page 7 ---
Pierre Loci 
ing to find a girl on E aster Island called Marie. She has no par-
ticular beauty beyond her figure of a young goddess, her youth 
and her fine teeth, while Iouarita:i would be accepted as a beauty 
everywhere and in all countries, with her slender little nose and 
her large fearful eyes; she has pulled back her hair, which is arti-
ficially reddened, in the manner of the ancients and decorated it 
with blades of grass . 
My God, how quickly time passes ... ! It is already half past ten 
and time for us to return to the ship for lunch . I can see, down 
below, crossing the belt of reefs, the whaling boat that is coming 
to collect us. My two friends return from their hunt, followed, as 
I am, by a group of singing escorts. The y have killed many white 
seabirds, which they distribute among the women, but not a sin-
gle rabbit . What poor quartermasters we are, all three of us ... ! 
And the great statues that I was supposed to find - I forgot 
about them completel y ... ! 
On board, we are welcomed back warmly nonetheless, and the 
officers are interested in all the things that I have brought to the 
ship with me. But I am very restless and, after midday, I return 
to the island and to my friends the savages. 
The wind is still blowing. Such winds must be typical of Easter 
Island, given that it is located in the region where the austral 
trade winds blow most strongl y. However, there remain only 
very few billowing fragments of the dark clouds of the early 
morning and a burning sun shines in a deep blue sky: we are 
very close to the tropics here. 
When I arrive on shore, I can tell that everyone must be asleep, 
having a midday siesta, but my five friends, who are waiting for 
me out of politeness, are sitting on the rocks looking very 
sleepy. 
I wouldn't mind sleeping for a few minutes but where might 
there be shade to lay my head on this island where there are nei-
ther trees nor bushes? 
72 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
After hesitating briefly, I go and ask the chief for hospitality 
and, crawling on all fours, I insinuate myself into his lodgings. 
It is very warm there and a crowd of bodies is stretched out on 
the ground. Indeed, under the thatched shell, which has a vol-
ume approximately equivalent to that of a canoe turned upside 
down, the chief lives with his family, namel y, his wife, two sons, 
a daughter, a son-in-law, a grandson , a large number of rabbits 
and chickens, and, finally, seven nasty, haughty cats with many 
kittens. 
The y settle me on a carpet made of braided reeds and, politely, 
all the people in the hut leave noiselessl y and one by one to go 
and sleep elsewhere . Only Atamou remains with me, fanning me 
with a fly whisk made of black feathers, and I fall asleep. 
Half an hour later, when I regain consciousness, I am com-
pletel y alone, surrounded by a silence that is broken only by the 
distant sounds of the sea on the coral reefs and, occasionall y, by 
the noise of the reeds of the hut as they rustle in a gust of wind. 
Waking up in this miserable shelter, I feel a tremend ous wave of 
homesickness . I feel so far away, so very far away, and lost. And 
I am gripped too by that particular anxiety that is associated 
with the oppressive nature of islands in general, which no island 
in the world could induce more intensely than this one. Sud-
denly, the immensity of the ocean that surrounds me starts to 
upset me and the effect is almost ph ysical. 
From the corner in which I am sitting, a ray of sunshine seems 
to burst into the hut through the hole that serves as a door and, 
on the floor, I see the shadow of one of the idols that guards the 
door - and the bizarre shadows of two cats, with ears that are 
too long, who are sitting, day dreaming and looking outside the 
hut .... Even the sunbeam and the bright light that it casts seem 
somehow strange, foreign and from "some earlier time". In the 
light from the sunbeam, in this silence and tropical breeze, I am 
struck by an indescribable sadness as I awake: a sadness from 
73 


--- Page 8 ---
Pierre Lori 
the dawn of history perhaps, which might, by some confused 
error, have taken root here, on the island on which I find myself 
and which the unchanging and eternal sun overheats at this hour 
of every day. 
Of course, this feeling passes quickly, disappearing like a child's 
mood, as soon as I become fully awake. And, without getting 
up, I amuse myself by examining the details of my shelter while 
mice, in spite of the two sentinel cats, scurry back and forth be-
side me. 
The reed roof above my head is held up by the ribs of palm 
fronds - but where might these have come from since there are 
no trees on the island and there is no vegetation other than low 
shrubs and grasses. In my hut, which is barely one and a half 
meters high and four meters long, a thousand items are careful 
attached to the walls: little idols made of black wood, which are 
wrapped in crude macrame; spears with flaked flint [sic] tips; 
paddles with human faces; feather headdresses; decorations for 
dance or battle; and many rather perturbing tools or weapons, 
whose uses I cannot fathom and which all seem to be extremely 
old. Our earliest ancestors, when they dared to come out of 
their caves, must have built dwellings of this type, decorated 
with similar objects. I feel that I am among an infinitely primi-
tive race, which is perhaps twenty or thirty thousand years less 
advanced than my own. 
And now, as I start to think about it, I wonder where all this 
desiccated wood for these clubs and idols might have come 
from and when? And the cats? And the rabbits? I suppose the 
missionaries must have brought them to the island. But what 
about the mice that scamper around inside all the huts - nobody 
would have brought them, would they? So where did they come 
from? The smallest things , on this distant island, raise questions 
to which there are no answers; it is amazing that there is both a 
flora and a fauna here. 
74 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
The people living on Easter Island came from the west, from 
the Polynesian archipelagos; of that there is no doubt . First of 
all, the people say so themselves. According to the traditions 
passed on by their elders, they left the closest Oceanian island a 
few centuries ago. The island is called Rapa and actually exists, 
with the same name, toda y. In honor of their very distant ori-
gins, they named their new home Rapa Nui (Great Rapa). 
Even if we accept that the first settlers came from Rapa, the 
mystery of their departure from Rapa and their journe y to Rapa 
Nui remains. The western regi9n of the Pacific Ocean between 
South America and Oceania encompasses, by itself, an area 
greater than the Atlantic Ocean; it is the greate st area of open 
sea in the world and it is the emptiest and most desolate region 
of the earth. In the middle lies tiny Easter Island, unique, and as 
insignificant as a pebble in the sea. Furthermore , the winds do 
not blow, as they do in France, from all directions: they blow 
always and unchangingl y from one direction. For voyagers from 
Polynesia, such winds would always be blowing in the wrong di-
rection . So, in their simple canoes, after who knows how many 
months of endless tacking back and forth, with what pro visions, 
and guided by what inexplicable instincts, how and why did 
these mysterious navigators manage to reach this tiny grain of 
sand , lost in the vast immensities of the ocean. 4 
However, it is indisputable that the first settlers were Polynesian 
or Maoris. The present islanders, whose complexions are paler 
than those of their ancestors because of the cloud y weather, 
have nonetheless retained their fine stature and handsome and 
characteristic faces, which are slightly elongated and oval in 
shape, with large eyes that are close together. The islanders have 
also retained many of the customs of their brothers who live far 
away. In particular , they speak the same language. 
For me, the fact that the Maori language is spoken here is one of 
the une xpected charms of the island since I started to study it in 
books by missionaries, in preparation for our imminent arrival 
in the "Delicious Isle of Tahiti" , about which I have dreamed 
75 


--- Page 9 ---
Pierre Loti 
since I was a child . And here, for the first time in my life, I can 
understand a few of those words that resonate in my ears in 
such a novel and melodiously wild manner. 
Unlike this morning, this evening I shall not forget about the 
great statues. I ask Atamou about them after my siesta, speaking 
in his own language, since he is the first person to return to find 
me. "Take me, please, to the 'Sepulchers'." He understands me 
perfectly. I used the word "Sepulchers" (in Tahitian, marae; and 
on Easter Island, marae) because these stone colossi, which are 
the reason for our visit to Easter Island, decorate the places 
where the great chiefs who fell in battle are buried under rocks 
that have been piled together to form tumuli. The natives also 
use the word marae [moai] for the thousand small fetishes and 
idols that ornament their reed huts and that are linked, for them, 
to memories of their dead. 
So off we go, Atamou and I, just the two of us without any ac-
companying crowds, to visit the closest marae: my first excur-
sion on this unknown island. 
After walking for a short distance along the shore, we cross a 
plain that is covered with coarse grass of a type that I have 
never seen before, which is sadly faded and wilted. 
On our way, we pass the ruins of a little house, similar to the 
one occupied by the Dane. Atamou tells me that it was the 
house of the "papa farani" (pere fran<;:ais = french father, mis-
sionary) and stops me to tell me more about him. Atamou acts 
the entire story with extravagant gestures. The story is obviously 
very moving but I cannot quite understand all the details . I can 
tell however from Atamou's gestures that there were am-
' 
' 
bushes, men hidden behind rocks, gun shots and spear 
wounds ... what did they do to this poor priest ... ? One never 
knows how violent a savage can become all of a sudden, even if 
he is usually sweet-tempered and kind, when he is impelled by 
some primitive passion or some shadowy superstition . One also 
76 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
should ri~t forget that the cannibal instinct slumbers in the 
depths of the Polynesian soul, even though the Polynesians 
themselves appear so welcoming and have such a debonair ap-
pearance . Indeed, in Oceania, on the islands of Routouma and 
Hivaoa, the Maoris, who appear totally charming, sometimes eat 
you. 
When he has finished telling his story, Atamou, who thinks that 
I have understood him perfectly, takes my hand and we set off 
agam. 
A little hill of brown stones rises up in front of us, resembling a 
gallic cromlech but made of much larger stones. On one side, 
the hill looks over the ocean, where no ships ever pass; on the 
other side it looks over a sad and deserted plain which ends in 
' 
' 
the distance, at the slopes of the craters of extinct volcanoes. 
Atamou confirms that this is a marae and the two of us clamber 
onto the pile of stones . 
We are on a massive platform, which is half hidden by crude 
and irregularly carved fallen columns. I ask to see statues since I 
see none . Atamou replies with a wave of his hand, which indi-
cates that I should look at my feet .... I am perching on the chin 
of a statue, which, lying on its back, is looking fixedly at me 
from below with the two holes that serve as its eyes. It never oc-
curred to me that the statues would be so large and so crudely 
carved . I am amazed that I could have missed the statue alto-
gether. In fact, I can now see about a dozen statues, lying bro -
ken and in disarray: some final shudders of the nearby volcanoes 
must, without a doubt, have toppled the statues . The noise of 
their weighty collapse must have been awesome. The face of 
each statue is carved with a childlike lack of skill; rudiments of 
arms and hands are barely indicated along the sides of the round 
body, such that each statue resembles a squat pillar. But they 
must have appeared as fearsome gods when they were standing, 
upright and enormous, facing the limitless and deserted ocean. 
Atamou tells me that there are other statues, further away on the 
77 


--- Page 10 ---
Pierre Loti 
island, many more, forming a tribe, supine and dead, along 
shores whitened by coral. 
At the foot of the platform there is a small circular beach, sur-
rounded by rocks, and we go down to the shore. The sea has 
crumbled corals of all types to make a snow-white sand, on 
which are scattered beautiful fragile seashells and slender 
branches of pink coral. 
As the day progresses, the wind starts blowing as strongly as it 
did yesterday, bringing with it, from the southern seas, a bank of 
black clouds, which are so black that the mountains, the craters 
of extinct volcanoes, begin to shine brightly under the suddenly 
darkened sky. And Atamou, realizing that it is about to rain, hur-
ries us home. 
Indeed, half way back, we are caught in a brief shower, while the 
angry wind beats down the grasses over the entire plain. We take 
shelter under some rocks that form an overhang - in the middle 
of a swarm of red dragonflies . And where did they come from, 
these creatures also? 
And the butterflies that we saw flying over the carpets of pale 
grass, white ones and yellow ones: who brought the eggs across 
eight hundred leagues of the Pacific Ocean ... ? 
The flock of dark clouds move away rapidly, to continue their 
voyage across the deserted seas, after having shed a few drops 
of rain as they passed over this mysterious island. By the time 
we reach the bay where our frigate is moored, the evening sun is 
shining. 
The region around the bay, where the reed huts are gathered, 
seems now to be astonishingly replete with life and joy since all 
the officers from the ship have come for a visit this afternoon 
and each is escorted by a group of natives. Now that it is time 
for the officers to return to the ship, they are waiting for the 
78 
Diary of a Cadet-1872 
rowboats, sitting on the ground surrounded by the big primitive 
children who were their friends for the day and who sing to 
them as part of the festivities. I sit down with the officers and 
immediately my own friends come running up to squeeze in be-
side me, namely, Petero, Houga, Marie, and the lovely Iouaritai. 
Alas, our visit of just a few hours has brought all kinds of ridicu-
lousness and falsity to this land of stark desolation. Almost all of 
us have bartered, for fetishes or weapons, various old pieces of 
clothing, with which the men with tattooed chests have child-
ishly bedecked themselves. And most of the women, either be-
cause they deem it appropriate or because they want to dress up, 
have put on cheap formless dresses of faded cotton, which the 
missionaries must have given their mothers and which have 
been lying unused beneath the thatch of their huts. 
They sing, all the Maoris sing, clapping their hands as if in the 
rhythm of a dance. The women sing as sweetly and clearly as 
birds. The men sing in high, thin, trembling falsetto voices and 
then in deep cavernous tones, which sound like the roaring of 
angry savages. The music is made up of short separated phrases, 
which they finish with lugubrious descending vocalizations, in a 
minor key. They sound as if they are expressing both how as-
tonishing and how sad life is - and yet they are singing for joy, 
for the childlike joy of seeing us and for their appreciation of 
the amusing little novelties that we have brought them . 
Their joy is the joy of just a single day. This joy, when we are far 
away tomorrow, will be replaced for the longest time by monot-
ony and silence. These savage singers are prisoners on their tree-
less waterless island, they are a condemned race, even there in 
Polynesia among their maternal islands. They are part of a dwin-
dling humanity and their unique destiny is to disappear. 
While these islanders clap their hands and enjoy themselves, 
mingling with us with such familiarity, others are watching us in 
a state of pensive immobility . On the rocks that surrounded us 
like an amphitheater, facing the sea, another segment of the 
79 


--- Page 11 ---
Pierre Loti 
population, more fearful or less friendly, is arrayed; these are 
people whom we have not met. There are men with many tat-
toos, kneeling with their hands clasped on their knees; there are 
women sitting as still as statues, with pieces of white cloth on 
their shoulders and, around their hair, which is gathered up in 
the style of the ancients, they have crowns of reeds. Not a 
movement, not a sign, not a single noise: all they do is watch us, 
at a distance, from above. And as we sail away in our boats, the 
setting sun, already level with the sea, shines a red light on them 
through a break in the clouds, which have suddenly returned; 
the sun illuminates only this silent group and the rocks on which 
they are standing, which appear to glow in the darkness of the 
sky and the brown shadows of the craters. 
In the evening, since I have to work tonight on board, I look 
over the documents on Easter Island that belong to the admiral. 
These documents date back to the time that the island was dis-
covered by "civilized" man but, as I learn and not to my sur-
prise, it is civilized man who has acted with ignoble savagery 
against the savages. 
Around 1850, a group of Peruvian colonists had the idea of 
sending ships to the island on a slave raid. The Maoris defended 
themselves against the guns of their aggressors as best they 
could, with spears and stones. Obviously, they were defeated, 
with large numbers killed, and hundreds of them were cruelly 
captured and taken as slaves to Peru. After several years, the au-
thorities in Lima arranged the repatriation of those who had not 
died of mistreatment or a broken heart . But when the exiles re-
turned home, they brought smallpox with them and more than 
half the remaining population of the island died of this new 
scourge, against which the island's sorcerers knew no remedy. 
January 5 
Today, once again, the captain allows one of my friends and me 
to take a rowboat, and we make our way back to the island just 
as day is breaking. As it did yesterday, the wind is blowing hard 
80 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
and straight in our faces, delaying our progress and soaking us 
from head to foot with spray. With some considerable difficulty, 
we reach the shore, having lost our way slightly among the coral 
reefs, among which the sea is rougher than ever and covered 
with white foam. 
Atamou and our friends from yesterday run to the shore to meet 
us, together with some islanders whose faces I don't recognize. 
Trading with the latter, I make 
the early-morning purchase of a 
god made of wood 5 with a sad 
and fearsome face and a head -
dress of black feathers . 
This is my friend's first visit to 
the island and, at his request, I 
take him first to see the ancient 
marae, from which we are going 
to try to remove a statue later in 
the day. A large crowd of people 
follows us across the plain of wet 
grasses and, when we arrive at 
the marae, they start to dance on 
the funerary stones and on the 
fallen idols. They dance all over 
the platform like a legion of wild 
things, with their hair in disarray 
and flying around in the wind . 
They are naked and coppery red, 
decorated with blue tattoos and 
Wood figure with feathers, from S. 
, 
Chauvet, 1934, Figure 139. 
their bodies are slender and 
bright against the dark stones 
and the bl~ck ho~ons. 
They dance and dance on the huge stat-
ues, stubb1ng their toes without complaint against the foreheads, 
noses and cheeks of the fallen statues. And I can hardly even 
hear what ~ey are singing because of the constant intermingling 
of the howling gusts of wind and the noise of the waves ... 
81 


--- Page 12 ---
Pierre Lori 
The men of Rapa Nui, who treat their little fetishes and little 
gods with such veneration, seem to have no respect at all for 
these tombs; they have no memories of those who are buried 
beneath them. 6 
Drawing from La Perouse , Trip round the World, showing the local women 
cavorting with sailors. From S. Chauvet 1934, Figure 16. 
We then return to the bay with the reed huts that I now know 
so well and I start to make visits in a less ceremonial manner 
than yesterday, with just a small entourage, that is to say accom-
panied only by my particular friends. I feel quite at home. The 
men that I meet limit their greetings to touching my hand or 
some other friendly gesture and then they continue on their way. 
"Ia ora na, taio!" (Hello, friend), say the "chiefess" and her 
daughter, who are in a field digging up sweet potatoes. They 
greet me without interrupting their work. The old chief receives 
me in a cave adjacent to his hut, where he spends his life kneel-
ing, with his hands clasped on his blue-tattooed knees. With his 
face and its dark blue stripes, his long hair, his long teeth and his 
animal-like pose, he might appear rather frightening were it not 
82 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
for the extreme sweetness of his expression . I no longer seem to 
interest him much and I don't stay more than a few minutes. 
I want to obtain one of the meter-wide headdresses made of 
black feathers that I have seen worn by some of the elders. But 
these men are difficult to approach and I explain what I want to 
Houga. He is the one who best understands my halting phrases 
and we start our search together. He brings me to several huts, 
in which ancients with blue faces and white teeth are kneeling, 
as motionless as mummies. Initially, they don't even seem to no-
tice my presence and one of them is busy pulling teeth out of a 
human skull to give new shiny eyes to his idol. In this particular 
hut there are, indeed, some very large feather headdresses, at-
tached below the roof, but the old man wants an insanely high 
price for them: my white trousers and my cadet's jacket with its 
gold trim, that is to say, my new jacket since I sold my other one 
Examples of feathered headdresses . From S. Chauvet 1934, Figure 10. 
yesterday. It's too much. I have to abandon my quest. When 
Houga sees how disappointed I am, he proposes to fix up, by 
this evening, a headdress that is slightly shabb y and worn that he 
has in his own hut. He offers to give it to me in exchange for 
just a pair of trousers - and I accept. 
Now we set off to visit the old Danish Robinson Crusoe, keep-
ing a promise that we made yesterday. The outside of the Dane's 
little house, by itself, is enough to break one's heart, with its 
makeshift verandah, and something resembling a little garden, in 
which grow a few skinny plants whose seeds he must have 
brought with him .... It is hard to imagine the isolation of such a 
83 


--- Page 13 ---
Pierre Loti 
man who doesn't even have a view, on this desert-like island, of 
a clump of trees or even a little greenery on which to rest his 
eyes. And if he has an emergency, if he falls sick or if he is on 
the brink of death, it is impossible for him to communicate with 
the rest of the world .... 
He left at dawn to hunt rabbits, he tells us with great courtesy, 
as he invites us into his home. His common-law wife is a Maori 
who is no longer young and who looks somewhat faded. She is, 
of course, the most elegant lady on the island . This morning she 
is wearing a yellow muslin tunic, with a traveling blanket of red 
wool that she has thrown like a shawl around her shoulders. She 
offers us fresh cold water from a clay jug - a rare gift since there 
are no springs on Rapa Nui. The natives collect water when it 
rains and store it in gourds, where it rapidly becomes undrink-
able, or they fetch water from the ponds inside the volcanic cra-
ters but these ponds often dry up. So much misery and so much 
sadness on this lonely island! And to think that it would be im-
possible for this man to get himself something different, even if 
he wanted it, because there is NOTHING 
anywhere. 
Elsewhere, hermits or those who have chosen a reclusive life 
can always, if they have a problem, return to civilization or call 
for help. But the Dane .... It sends shivers down my spine to 
imagine how he must feel on rainy evenings, when dusk falls in 
stormy weather, and during the long darkness of winter nights 
We do not want to exploit the hospitality of our hostess, in par-
ticular since things might turn out badly for one or both of us, 
and, when it is lunchtime for our oarsmen (ten o'clock), we re-
turn to our frigate . On board, the men have been working since 
early morning on preparations to remove a statue from the is-
land since the admiral has decided that we should do this today 
if possible and then leave for Oceania. 
At midday, a team is ready to go and remove one of the great 
idols. The frigate's sloop is loaded with huge wooden levers, a 
84 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
kind of improvised cart and one hundred volunteers, under the 
command of a lieutenant from the ship. But it is my turn to 
work on board so, alas, all I can do is watch sadly as the expedi-
tion sets off for the shore. 
However, at the very last min-
ute, the admiral, whom I serve 
as senior cadet, calls me onto 
the bridge. He has decided to 
postpone my guard duty until 
tomorrow on condition that r 
bring him a detailed sketch of 
the marae, made before it is dis-
turbed by our activities. I am 
amazed that my talent for 
sketching should have turned 
out to be so useful on this trip 
and that, as a result, I have been 
given permission to go and have 
fun! I jump joyfully into the 
sloop, which is already packed 
with sailors, who are as excited 
as if we are all going to a party. 
Drawing of an ahit by Pierre Lori. 
From S. Chauvet 1934, Figure 37. 
With its heavy cargo, the sloop has problems crossing the reefs 
that separate the ship from a bay that is closer to the marae than 
the bay where we first disembarked. We reach the shore none-
theless, but it is clear that we might have difficulties re~g 
to 
the ship when our load is increased by the weight of an idol. 
Obviously, two trips will be required to bring all the sailors back 
to the ship . 
The natives have gathered in a big crowd on the beach and wel-
come us with piercing cries. Since yesterday, the news that we 
plan to take a statue has spread and the islanders have all assem-
bled to watch the proceedings. Even natives who live on La 
Perouse Bay, on the other side of the island, have come to 
85 


--- Page 14 ---
Pierre Loti 
watch and so we see many new faces. 
The ship's lieutenant in charge of the sailors insists that the hun-
dred men march up to the marae in formation. As the bugles 
sound, the crowd becomes ecstatic: they have never heard any-
thing that resembles such music. It is difficult to maintain order 
among the sailors since they are surrounded by half-naked 
women who are having fun dancing and cavorting around them. 
At the marae, it is no longer possible to maintain any kind of 
discipline. There is wild confusion of sailors' jerseys and tat-
tooed flesh as the sailors and natives interact in a riotous frenzy. 
Everyone is brushing against and shoving everyone else, danc-
ing, shouting, and singing. After an hour, everything on the plat-
form has been knocked about by the tools and the levers that 
we brought with us. The statues are even more damaged and 
chipped than they were yesterda y, and it is hard to know which 
one to choose. 
One statue, which appears to be lighter and less badly damaged 
than the others, is lying with its head down and its nose in the 
dirt. In order to see its face, we shall have to turn it over. The 
levers, maneuvered with loud shouts, succeed in pivoting the 
statue around its axis and the statue rotates onto its back with a 
loud thud. The sight of the statue rolling over and falling down 
again causes the natives to dance even faster and more furiously, 
with an even louder clamor of voices . Twenty savages jump 
onto the statue's belly and dance like madmen .... The bodies of 
their distant ancestors, sleeping under the piled-up stones, have 
never heard such a commotion, except perhaps when the statues 
themselves keeled over, all shaken simultaneousl y by some kind 
of earthquake, or when, as a result of old age, the statues fell 
headfirst, one by one, onto the grass. 
It is decided that we shall take the statue that has been turned 
over. However, we shall not take its entire bod y, only its head. 
The head, by itself, is huge, weighing four or five tons . The job 
86 
of sawing off the head begins. 
Luckily for us, the statue is made 
of a kind of volcanic rock that is 
rather friable and the saws slice 
through it easily, although they 
do make a dreadful grinding 
noise. 7 
When, amid all the clamor, I fin-
ish my sketch for the admiral, I 
leave the scene. The final deta~h-
ment of the head from the bod y 
of the statue and loading of the 
severed head on the sloop don't 
interest me. With my faithful . 
friends Atamou, Petero, Marie 
and Iouarita:i, I return to the bay 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
The statue head now in Musee de 
l'Homme in Paris. Photo from S. 
Chauvet 1934, Figure 40. 
where the huts are located to see the progress of repairs on the 
crown of feathers that Houga has promised to finish by this 
very everung. 
Indeed, I find this fine little savage hard at work, as I had hoped. 
He has cut the tail off a black cock to replace the worn-out 
feathers and, as he works, the crown starts to look very impres-
sive. 
While I am walking past the cave of the old chief, he beckons to 
me with an engaging and confidential air. He shows me some 
black dust in a pouch of dead leaves, which he refers as 
"tattoo". It is the material with which the natives color their tat-
toos and, since I have shown such an interest in the islanders' 
crafts, he offers to tattoo my legs lightly with a few designs - in 
exchange for my trousers, which I would give him for his trou-
ble. 
Another old man also takes me to his home to exchange a pair 
of earrings made of the backbone of a shark for a box of Swed-
87 


--- Page 15 ---
Pierre Loci 
ish matches. This evening, once again, I shall return to the ship 
with a thousand amazing things . 
The bay that we have chosen as our base is dominated by the 
Rano Kaou crater, which is perhaps the widest and the most 
perfectly circular crater in the world. 8 
When the sun has almost reached the horizon, I sit once again 
with my five friends, facing the sea, at the place where we have 
become accustomed to wait together for the arrival of the ca-
noes. This might be the last time we do this since I can see, in 
the distance, the sloop returning to the ship and, in the center of 
a mass of sailors in white, the large brown head of the idol that 
is leaving the island with them. Thus, the expedition has turned 
out as planned and we are likely to leave tomorrow . I almost say 
out loud, "That's too bad; I would have liked to stay longer" 
In the evening, however, just as I am getting into my hammock, 
the captain calls for me and I have a premonition that some-
thing new is planned for the following day. 
Indeed, the captain tells me that our departure has been post-
poned for twenty four hours. He plans to make a trip tomorrow, 
with some of the officers, to the farthest region of the island, 
where there are statues that are quite different from the ones 
that we have seen and that are still standing. The trip will proba-
bly be difficult and long . On the map, which we study together, 
the distance to be covered is about six leagues as the crow flies. 
With detours and hilly country, that will be more like seven or 
eight, and then we have to come back again .... And then he asks 
me if I would like to go with him . Of course , I'm dying to go . 
But, tomorrow, alas, I am on guard duty as a result of having 
taken today off. 
"I'll take care of that with the admiral," he says, and then, laugh-
ing, he adds, "On one condition .... " Oh yes, he wants some 
drawings. He wants me to draw the statues from all angles and 
88 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
for everyone to see .... I'll do as many as he wants just so long as 
he'll take me with him!9 
January 6 
It is not yet four in the morning and it is still pitch dark when 
we leave the ship under thick clouds. We reach the shore before 
daybreak, choosing a difficult and isolated spot in order not to 
wake the natives, who would all want to come with us. There 
are five of us: the staff captain, the captain, two officers, and 
myself, plus the old Dane and a Maori that he has brought with 
him serve as our guide. Three ·sailors follow us, carrying our 
lunch and theirs on their shoulders. Over by the reed huts, we 
can see fires through the grass. 
First we pass the marae that was wrecked yesterday; toda y it 
looks quite sinister . The sky is completely covered, apart from a 
break in the clouds on the eastern horizon, through which a yel-
low glow announces the dawn. 
We walk in single file through the wet grass towards the interior 
of the island, which we have to cross from one end to the other. 
After half an hour, the sea and the distant lights of the frigate 
disappear from sight behind the slope of a hill, which makes us 
feel even more isolated than before . We reach the central region 
of the island. This part of the captain's map of the island is cov-
ered with the word "T ekaouhangoaru", written in large letters in 
the handwriting of the Bishop of Tahiti. Tekaouhangoaru is the 
first of the names that the Polynesians gave to the island. More 
even than the name Rapa Nui, the name echoes with the sounds 
of a sad wilderness surrounded by wind and shadows. 
Even at those times when the population of the island was large, 
it appears that the interior of the island remained uninhabited. 
The same is true of other islands settled by the Maoris, who are 
a race of fishermen and sailors whose lives are focused on the 
sea. Thus, the center of Tahiti and that of Nuka Hiva even 
' 
though they are covered with lush vegetation and forests full of 
89 


--- Page 16 ---
Pierre Loci 
flowers, have never been anything but silent and deserted. But 
there are no forests here on Rapa Nui, no trees, nothing, just de-
nuded and funereal downs, with innumerable little pyramids of 
stones planted everywhere -
like cemeteries that go on for ever. 
The sun rises but the sky remains very dark; it starts to drizzle 
and we seem to be moving forward but making no progress. 
The horizon is enclosed on all sides by one crater after another, 
all of which look identical, with the same truncated-cone shape 
and colored the same shade of brown. 
We are up to our knees in wet grass. This grass never varies and 
covers the entire island. It is some kind of crude grayish green 
plant with woody stems ornamented with tiny violet flowers. 
The plants are surrounded by thousands of the tiny bugs that, in 
France, are called "ephemerals" [mayflies]. The pyramids that 
we continue to pass at every step are made of unworked stones, 
which have simply been piled on top of one another. Time has 
colored them black and they seem to have been here for centu-
nes. 
Now we enter a valley where the vegetation changes slightly. 
There are fems and wild sugar cane, some skinny mimosa 
bushes, and a few other low shrubs, which the officers recog-
nize as being common all over Oceania, even though, on other 
islands, they grow into trees. Did people bring them here or 
have they been here since the mysterious early times? And why 
have they remained stunted here, restricted to this one spot, in-
stead of developing as they do elsewhere and invading other 
parts of the island. 
Finally, at about half past nine, having crossed the island at its 
widest, we see the blue waters of the Pacific Ocean once again, 
stretched out in front of us. And the rain stops, the clouds break 
up and the sun comes out. It seems as if we have emerged from 
T ekaouhangoaru as one would awake from a nightmare of rain 
and dark shadows. 
90 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
In the distance, near the shore, we see something that looks like 
a little European house . As our Danish friend tells us, it is the 
third house that the missionaries built some time ago. In this re-
gion, which is called V aihou, there used to be a happy tribe of 
natives who lived by the shore at that time. But nobody lives 
here now. V aihou is deserted and the little house is in ruins. 
We can already catch a glimpse of Ranoraraku, at the foot of 
which we shall, apparently, find statues that are different from 
all the others, stranger and still standing upright . We are only 
about two leagues away from our destination . Therefore, we 
stop here, at the empty house, for lunch both because that will 
take the weight off our sailors' shoulders and because we shall 
have at least part of a roof to give us some shade. 
A very old and exceedingly ugly native woman shows her face at 
the door and then approaches us with timid smiles. She is the 
only living being that we meet on our journey. She has made 
this lonely little ruin into her home and, without a doubt, she 
must be the daughter of some vanished tribe. But what could 
she live on and what could she possibly find to eat? Roots, 
probably, lichens, and any fish that she can catch. 
Beyond V aihou, we cross an area that is rutted with footpaths 
that are so clearly visible and well-trodden that one would think 
that vast crowds pass this way every day. And yet there is not a 
soul anywhere. We have been told that the place is deserted and 
we can see that, indeed, it is. Our native guide tells us that, apart 
from the old woman, there is nobody within five leagues in any 
direction. It is hard to know what to make of his statement .... 
On this island, everything raises disquieting questions. 
The place that we are heading towards must have been, in the 
dark nights of the past, some kind of religious center, temple or 
necropolis, but now it is in ruins. All around are the bases of cy-
clopean statues, the remains of thick walls, the debris from giant 
construction projects. And the grass, which is getting taller and 
91 


--- Page 17 ---
Pierre Loci 
taller, hides traces of mysterious earlier times . The grass has 
woody stems that resemble those of broom - always the same 
kind of grass and always the same faded green. 
Now we are walking 
along the shore. Be-
side the beaches, on 
the cliffs, there are 
terraces made of im-
mense stones . People 
must have climbed 
onto these terraces 
via ramps similar to 
those of ancient 
Hindu pagodas. The 
terraces were the sites 
of huge idols, whi ch 
have tumbled down 
headfirst, burying 
their faces in the rub -
ble. These idols 
would have repre-
sented spirits of the 
type worshipped by 
other Polynesians, 
such as the Spirit of 
the Sands and the 
Spirit of the Rocks, 
the two guardians 
that protect islands 
Drawing of an Easter Island scene, by Pierre Loti 
January 7, 1872. From S. Chauvet 1934, Figure 13. 
against the onslaught of the sea.10 
It was here, in the midst of these ruins, that the missionaries dis-
covered a number of small wooden tablets, carved with hiero-
glyphics. The Bishop of Tahiti owns them today and, without a 
doubt, they will provide a key to the enigma of Rapa Nui if 
someone ever manages to translate them. 
92 
biil"}' of a Cadet - 1872 
We pass more and more gods as we gci. closer and c½ser to Ra-
noraraku, and they get bigger and bir,ger too. We measu;e some 
of them and th~y are ten and even eleven meters tall, each one 
carved in one piece. There are statues scattered all ove~ the 
place, not only at the base of terraces. Wherever we look, we see 
the tops of these massive brown statues above the tall grass. 
Their headdresses, which were a kind of turban, were made of a 
different type of blood -red lava and they must have rolled all 
over the place when the statues fell over. They look like giarn . 
millstones. 
Near one tumulus, there is a pile of charred skulls and jawbones, 
which seem to provide evidence of human sacrifices that might 
have taken place at this site for some long period of time. And -
yet another mystery - there are paved roads here, just like Ro-
man roads, that descend to the shore and disappear into the 
Ocean ... ! 
There are not only skulls and jawbones but bones of all types 
everywhere around here . You cannot dislodge a clump of dirt 
without disturbing some human remains, and it seems as if this 
part of the island might once have been a vast ossuary. 
There was a terrible time, in the past, that is still spoken of with 
awe by the old people of today. There were too many islanders 
on Rapa Nui and many of them starved to death on this island 
that nobody was able to leave. As a result, great wars erupted 
among the tribes, with wholesale massacres and cannibalism. All 
this happened at a time when the white man did not even sus-
pect the existence of Oceania. However, in the last century, 
when Vancouver landed on the island, on which there were 
barely more than two thousand inhabitants, he was still able to 
see traces of armed camps on all the mountains and remains of 
fortification barriers on the slopes of all the craters. 
The large numbers of carved blocks, which have been trans -
ported and assembled into platforms, attest to the presence, for 
centuries, of a powerful race that was skilled in working with 
93 


--- Page 18 ---
Pierre Loci 
stone - but it is impossible to explain how they achieved what 
they did . . Almost all peoples passed initially through a megalithic 
stage, during which they had at their disposal forces of which we 
are totally ignorant.11 
Scientists say, it is true, that the statues are made of trachytic 
rock, which is hard and resists wear. This might be true of the 
great statues at Ranoraraku but it cannot be true of the statues 
, ..._ 
;tat 
are scattered along the shore, which I have seen cut up eas-
/ with a wood saw and which are made of a light and friable 
.J].a terial. 
',~ ) 
I should note that the island seems very small in proportion to 
the considerable area that is occupied by monuments and idols. 
Could this have been a sacred island, to which people came 
from ~.fur for religious ceremonies during the ancient times of 
great Polynesian, _splendor, when the kings of the archipelagos 
still had war canoes that were capable of confronting great 
storms on the open seas? Could these kings have come, from all 
over the Pacific Ocean, to gather in council in the caves here, 
speaking a secret language .. .? Or is this island the last remnant 
of a continent that was submerged long ago, like Atlantis? The 
roads that disappear into .the ocean suggest that this hypothesis 
might be true but Maori legends make no mention of such a 
place. Moreover, when Atlantis disappeared, it formed giant pla-
teaus under the sea, while the shores of Easter Island descend 
immediately to immeasurable depths .... 
As we march in single file, endlessly, along the narrow paths of 
the natives, through the high grass and amidst so much desola-
tion, silence and mystery, we are overtaken by fatigue and a 
sense of disquiet. Moreover, the statues lying on the ground eve-
rywhere are in all respects similar to the ones that we have al-
ready seen; they differ only insofar as they are slightly bigger but 
their shapes and faces are the same . 
We ask our guide where the "other" statues are that we have 
94 
Diary of a Cadet-
1872 
come so far to see, the other statues that are supposed to be dif-
ferent from the ones we've seen, that are supposed still to be 
standing upright.... 
''You'll see them soon," he says, "Over there on the slopes of 
Ranoraraku. There is a unique group of statues there and you 
won't find statues like them anywhere else." 
Moreover, the footpaths now abandon the shore a~d turn to-
wards the interior of the island, in the direction of the volcano. 
We have been walking for about an hour and a half since we 
--:-iiiJJ~
·~~~{Q ' -
The outer slope of Rano Raraku . 
From a sketch by Routledge 1919, Figure. 47. 
stopped at V aihou when we start to glimpse, on the slopes of 
the mountain, giant statues that cast huge shadows on the sad 
grass. They are not arranged in any particular pattern and most 
are looking in our direction as if to see who is coming towards 
them. We also see some extended profiles, with pointed noses, 
that are facing in other directions. These are the statues that we 
want to see - they really are. Our efforts have not been in vain 
and involuntarily, as we approach them, we lower our voices. 
These statues are, indeed, quite different from the large numbers 
of statues that were lying down, asleep, all along our route. Even 
though they seem to have come from an earlier time, they are 
95 


--- Page 19 ---
Pierre Lori 
the work of less childlike craftsmen, who were able to carve ex-
pressions on their faces, and their faces are frightening. In addi-
tion, they have no bodies; they are only colossal heads, emerging 
out of the ground at the end of long necks. They appear to be 
gazing into the still and silent distance. What members of what 
human race do their features represent, with the upward tilt of 
the ends of their noses and their thin lips, which are fixed in a 
pout of disdain or mockery? Each has no eyes, only deep cavi-
ties beneath its forehead, under a vast and noble brow - and yet 
the statues seem to be looking and thinking. There is a furrow 
on the side of each cheek, which might represent some kind of 
coiffure, as in the case of the Sphinx, or ears that are set back 
and flattened. The statues vary in height from five to eight me-
ters. Some of them have necklaces, made of fragments of em-
bedded flint [sic], or furrows representing tattoos. 
Clearly, these statues are not the work of the Maoris. According 
to the traditions of the old folk, these statues were on the island 
before the arrival of their ancestors. The emigrants from Poly-
nesia, upon landing after their long voyages a thousand or so 
years ago, would have found an island that had been deserted 
for the longest time, guarded only by these monstrously large 
heads. What race of men, which has disappeared without leaving 
any other mementos in human history, might have lived here 
long ago, and how did this race die out? 
And who will ever be able to tell us the age of these divinities .. .? 
With their thick incrustations of lichen, they seem to have the 
patina of uncountable centuries, just like Celtic menhirs. 12 Some 
statues have fallen over and some are broken. Others, as a result 
of time and movement of the subsoil, have become buried up to 
their nostrils and seem to be sniffing the ground. 
The midday sun flames above the statues, a tropical sun that ex-
aggerates their harsh expressions by making their eye sockets 
darker under their overhanging brows, and the slope of the cra-
ter elongates the shadows that fall on the cemetery grass. In the 
96 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
sky, the few last remaining wisps of clouds are dissolving on a 
stunningly magnificent blue background . The wind has died 
down and all is quiet around these ancient statues. However , 
when the winds no longer blow, what will trouble the funereal 
peace of this place? Who will disturb its grassy shroud? Nobody 
ever comes here and there is not one single beast, not one single 
bird and not one single snake on the island. The only wild crea-
tures are the yellow butterflies and the flies that buzz so quietly. 
We are half way up the mountain, here, in the midst of the 
smiles of these huge stone faces. Above our heads is the edge of 
the crater of the extinct volcano; below us is the deserted plain, 
with scattered ruins and fallen statues, and , in the distance is the 
infinity of the ocean, on which a ship is almost never ever seen. 
But I must be quick and, as I have promised, I have to sketch 
these lonely figures, these groups of statues standing motionless 
in the sun, while my companions snooze in the grass. I draw 
hastily, hurrying to record every detail, even though I am tired 
and have to fight a fearsome desire to sleep. I want to make 
drawings so that I can remember every particularity and all the 
strangeness of what is being imprinted on my memory. 
And just as I finish, it's time to leave. The captain is worried, as 
are we all, about the long journey that we must make, before 
nightfall, across the deserted center of the island. So we must 
go, certain that we shall never again return to see these gods in 
their extraordinary domain. 
At about two o'clock , at the hottest hour of the day, with the 
sun shining uninterruptedl y right in our eyes, we set off again in 
single file along the narrow paths whose existence we cannot 
explain, with the same grass all around us at all times, sometimes 
up to our knees and sometimes as high as our belts. 
And, in spite of the morning's downpours , the grass isn't even 
damp and neither is the ground. How can this land dry out so 
rapidly, with the earth turning to dust within several hours of 
97 


--- Page 20 ---
Pierre Loci 
meaning that is really important, could not be determined and 
the language on the tablets remains unintelligible for ever. 
Someone is calling me .... Someone from the admiral's staff. This 
evening, just as I did yesterday and just as I did the day before, 
when I was called unexpectedly, I sense some new design that 
might take me once more to the dark island. 
Indeed, the admiral would like a stone figure of a god, of par-
ticular dimensions and with particular features. And, as he 
knows that his senior cadet has been in many of the islanders' 
dwellings, he asks if I can arrange to get such a figure for him. 
He wants to know, too, if I can do it expeditiously, at dawn to-
morrow morning, without delaying the departure of the frigate, 
which is set for six o'clock in the morning. 
In fact, I do recall an idol that meets all his specifications, in the 
hut of the old chief himself. I agree to bring it back for the ad-
miral before we cast off, in exchange for a greatcoat that he will 
give me. Then, delighted with the chance to return once more to 
Rapa Nui, I go over in my mind, before I go to sleep, many 
phrases in Polynesian for one last supreme conversation with 
my savage friends. 
January 7 
At four o'clock in the morning, I am on my way in the admiral's 
whaling boat. By chance, the air is calm but the sky is so cloudy, 
so black! It has been the same every day since our arrival: thick 
and unbroken clouds delay the arrival of daylight on the island 
and over the sea. 
And here I am, once more, in the half light of the morning, in 
the midst of the breakers and the reef, returning to the bay that 
I thought I would never see again. The nocturnal view of the 
shore is as fantastic today as it was on the morning of my first 
visit. There are heavy shadows in the valleys on the old extinct 
volcanoes, while the coastline is already vaguely visible. Here 
100 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
an? there, among the rocks and the huts that are barely distin-
guishable, fires are burning in the 
grass, with dancing yellow flames 
and, as they pass in front of the fires, 
one can see the outlines of a few of 
the women; they are wandering 
around, watching roots or yams 
cooking in the fire. As we get closer, 
we can smell the smoke and wild, 
animal-like odors. And these naked 
shapes, this primitive behavior, re-
vealed by the glow of the fires, 
makes me dream of ancient times. In 
prehistoric times, in colder climes, 
the light of dawn must similarly have 
lit up the awakening of a Stone Age 
tribe and their preparations for the 
day .... 
The women obviously get up earlier 
than the men here because I am met 
first by Marie and Iouarita:i. They 
didn't think that they would ever see 
me or any of us again. There are 
An Easter Island stone carving. 
From S. Chauvet 1934, 
Figure 61. 
great cries of joy. Someone runs to the old chiefs hut to tell him 
that I want to see him and that I am in a hurry. He comes out of 
his _hut. He agrees to my offer. In exchange for his stone idol, 
which two of my sailors carry off with their hands linked to 
form a chair, I give him the admiral's beautiful greatcoat and he 
puts it on right away. 
There is no time to lose. We have to go back down to the shore. 
In a few seconds, all my friends arrive to see me once more. 
Houga, who has been woken in a hurry, appears wrapped in a 
mantle of tree bark. Then I hear Atamou run up behind me and 
finally Petero, that skinny lunatic. These really are our last fare-
wells this time. In a few hours, Easter Island will have disap-
101 


--- Page 21 ---
Pierre Loci 
peared from my view forever . And, truly, we have become 
friends of a sort, perhap s as a result of the deep difference s be-
tween us or perhaps becau se of a common childishness . 
It is almost daylight when I return to the whaling boat with the 
stone idol. My five friends remain on the shore, to watch me as 
I disappear from view. Onl y the old chief, who came down to 
the shore to see me off, is returning slowly to his hut . And, see-
ing him looking so ridiculous and pathetic in his admiral's great -
coat with his long naked tatto oed legs sticking out beneath it, I 
feel that I might not have shown him sufficient respect, when I 
made our bargain, and that I might have treated him with much 
less than the dignity that he deserved .14 
Endnote s [the author 's original notes are in bold] 
1 On e league equals approxim ately four kilometer s. 
2 The preceding paragraph is based on a play on words. Th e word "N ui" in 
Rapa Nui and the French word for night "nuit " are pronounced simi-
larly. 
3 The D ane was Christian Schmidt , a carpenter who worked for Dutron-
Bornier. Schmidt was the ancestor of a large Rapanui family, the Tuki . 
4 According to the traditions of the Maoris and their genealogies, 
the 
first settlers reached the island only about a thousand years ago. 
Editor s' note: from this point on, Loti refers to the Ea ster Islanders as 
"maori". 
s "bois de fer", which tran slates as ''Brazilian ironwoo d" or Caesalpinia 
fe"ea. 
6 It is generally accepted that the statues on Easter Island were not 
carved by the Maoris but were carved by an earlier race of people 
that is now extinct. This might be true for the great statues at Ra-
noraraku, about which I shall speak later. But the countless stat-
ues that, long ago, graced the marae along the shore do belong to 
the Maoris and represent, quite probably, the Spirit of the Sands 
and the Spirit of the Rocks. 
7 The statue head is now in the foyer of the Musee de l'H omme in Paris. It 
may have come from Ahu o Rongo, located on the shoreline at Hang a 
Roa. Metraux (1970:46) state s that the site was called ahu Ana Koiroro a, 
a name that is no longer recognized. As "ana" means cave, there likely 
was some misund erstandin g on the part of Metraux . 
s On Easter Island, the names of all the craters begin with "Rano", 
which actually means "pond". The reason for this designation is 
102 
Diary of a Cadet - 1872 
that the interior of each of the craters has become a swamp, from 
which the natives collect water after heavy rains. However, the 
choice of the term "Rano" implies that the Maoris who first took 
possession of the island must have found the water-filled craters of 
volcanoes that were already extinct. This conclusion tends, more -
over, to disprove the generally accepted theory that the island 
must have been shaken up and "diminished" as a result of fiery 
eruptions that occurred after the island had been settled by the 
Maoris . 
9 All this is happening in 1872. Camer as and the stereopticon have not yet 
been invented. 
10 Tii -One and Tii-Papa, the Spirit of the Sands and the Spirit of the 
Rocks, are names 'that come from the old chiefs on the island of 
Laivavai (Toubouai Archipelago, Polynesia), who explained what 
they mean. On Laivavai, there are statues with the same features 
as those of the statues on Rapa Nui, but the former are not as high 
and in better condition than the latter. (Loti is referring to the archi-
pelago ofTubuai, and Raivavae island which has large monolithic stat-
ues). 
11 In the case of the Maoris, it would seem that the "Age of Great 
Stones" continued into modem times since the volcanic lava of 
which some of their statues are made is not very durable; the idols 
by the shore could not be more than three or four hundred years 
old. 
12 Standin g stones in Brittany and elsewhere. 
13 Monsignor d' Axieri, the missionary bishop who lived for man y years 
in Polynesia, has a great many of these tablets and he recorded the 
literal meaning of each character, as it was told to him by some old 
chiefs from Easter Island, who are now dead. A glimpse is pro-
vided below of the documentation 
that he left, which is quite 
unique. 
14 The last sentence can also end as follows: " .... and that I might have been 
guilty of treating him with lese-sauvagerii', where the term "lese-sauvagerii' 
is used by Loti in analogy to "lese-mqjeste', which is untran slatable to the 
extent that it is often used even in English senten ces. 
103 

