--- Page 1 ---
Woman of Easter Island, from S. Chauvet, 1934, Figure 15. 
104 


--- Page 2 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
b A d B 
after a sketch by Pinart. This 
L 'fie de Paques, vue de la mer, drawn y . e a~ 
1 kin t 
ard the cliffs 
view appears to be from La Perouse bay, per aps oo 
g ow 
above Ovahe . 
106 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
Voyage to Easter Island 
1877 
by Alphonse Pinart 
I n 1877, at 8.30 on Easter morning, 1 we were on board the 
Seigne!qy 
when th~ island first came into view and we were 
able to make out, from the bridge of the ship, a distant coastline 
against which waves were 
crashing with tremendous 
force. 
Located at 27° 9' South 
and 111 ° 45' East, the 
Easter Island, because of 
its triangular shape and 
the presence of a volcano 
at each corner of the tri-
angle, appeared from the 
ship to be a group of 
three small islands. It was 
only at ten o'clock that 
we were able to distin-
guish Cape Roggeween 
and a long stretch of the 
coast on the east-
southeast The terrain is 
low in that part of the is-
land but the land rises to 
the northeast between 
Cape Roggeween and 
Alphonse Pinart, Dec ember 20, 1879 (?) 
© Th e Bancroft Library, UC Berkeley. 
O'Higgins Point , where there is a steep cliff made of reddish 
lava with signs of numerous landslides. 
107 


--- Page 3 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
We sailed along the south coast of the island, intending to dis-
embark towards the west in Hanga Roa Bay. Very near land, at 
the entrance to La Perouse Bay, we noticed a little sandy inlet 
where the sea was calm. Nonetheless, we continued on our way 
and, after passing the western point of La Perouse Bay, we came 
upon another little circular inlet, known to the natives as 
Anakena Bay. From the ship, we were easily able to make out 
fields of banana trees and sugar cane . 
Examining the coast with more care, we noted the point on the 
northwest of the island that was the highest of all and we found 
ourselves, at one o clock, within sight of Mataveri on whose 
higher ground we could see houses, with the mission church 
down in the valley. The sea was very rough and huge waves 
hammered the coastline . We were unable to find a safe place to 
drop anchor with ease and we had not yet found the little port 
of Hanga Pilrn. 
The shore was deserted and there was not a native to be seen. 
We signaled our arrival by firing a canon and, sailing up the 
coast , we headed for La Perouse Bay, where we dropped anchor 
at two in the afternoon. A few moments later, the skiff brought 
us to shore and we landed in the little inlet mentioned above, 
which we named Seignelay Inlet. It opens at the foot of a cliff of 
porous red lava, within which there are many hidden caves. The 
first thing that we did was to visit some of these caves and we 
could tell that the natives often took shelter here when they 
were in these parts. One of the caves contained a skeleton that 
was still enveloped in matting, as well as many skulls. 
On the left of the beach there was a little tumulus and, on a 
nearby point, there was a large quantity of stones that had been 
piled up in an orderl y manner and marked the site of ancient 
graves. The smell of dead bodies that wafted around us sug-
gested that a burial had occurred recently. Soon we were certain 
that such was the case and we learned later that the natives took 
advantage of ancient graves to bury their dead, being content 
108 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
simply to remove a few stones and dig a shallow pit in which 
they laid the bod y which they would then cover, but only barely, 
with the stones that they had removed originally. 
We wanted to make our way on foot to Hanga Roa and we were 
getting ready to walk 
around the small hill that 
formed the east side of 
La Perouse Bay when we 
saw a group of Kana~s 
caught sight of us, they 
,:_,._ 
_ _, - · .,, - · '!:-j/t-· 
stopped, at a distance of 
about fifty feet. But as 
soon as we called out to 
them, they came towards 
us fearlessly, shouting 
their greeting, ia-ora-na. 
They were dressed in 
European clothes and 
Tumulus de la baie de la Perouse-, drawn by A. de 
Bar, after a sketch by Pin art. This appe ars to 
be a tupa althou gh the extra pile of rocks on 
the top is atypical. 
our first question to them was whether Dutrou-Bornier was still 
on the island. They answered that he was dead! 
We gathered that this event had happened only a few days previ-
ously. The way the Kanacs drew our attention to their clothes 
seemed to suggest something abnormal and we were not far 
from thinking that they might have murdered Dutrou-Bornier,
2 
in spite of their telling us that he had died from falling off his 
horse while drunk. We learned later on that our suspicions had 
been unfounded. Our first question to the natives had been 
about Dutrou-Bornier because his name, evoking for us our dis-
tant motherland, was that of a devout and courageous sea cap-
tain who had not been afraid to come and live on an inhospita-
ble island with the aim of making it a better place. Having made 
his home for several years on the island, he had lived to see his 
efforts rewarded and had shown the Kanacs a future full of 
109 


--- Page 4 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
promise, which had, perhaps, with the death of this patient set-
tler, evaporated forever. 
Our encounter with the natives had delayed us. The late hour 
prevented us from continuing further; our suspicions about the 
death of the captain suggested that it might be prudent to return 
Murai/le avec tumulus. -Ancien village d'Ovahe, drawn by A. de Bar, after a sketch 
by Pinart. Again, piles of rocks on what appears to be an ahu, as shown here, 
are not typical. 
to the ship and so we went back to the beach, preceded by our 
K.anacs on their horses. They had been joined by two K.anacs on 
foot, each dressed in a kind of jacket with a piece of fabric se-
cured between his thighs. We arrived at La Perouse Bay as night 
was falling, passing the ancient village of Ovahe. 
On April 2, in spite of the rain, we returned to land with nine of 
the crew as porters to carry our gear and camping equipment. 
We made contact again with the K.anacs that we had met on the 
previous day. After spending the night in the caves on the cliff, 
they were waiting to escort us to the Ronororaka volcano. The 
first thing we wanted to do, however, was to go back to the cave 
in which we had seen the skeleton, which we wanted to add to 
take with us. An old Kanae in the group protested when we 
tried to remove the skeleton. He told us that it was the bones of 
one of his wives and that we were doing something shameful. A 
few leaves of tobacco were enough to assuage his anger, but it 
was unclear whether this anger was real or an act. Moreover, for 
110 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
some additional leaves of the coveted plant, he even promised 
to help us find more bones. 
Behind the village of Ovahe, we noticed a long wall of stones 
that had been piled with great regularity upon one another. The 
~all was about 50 meters long, 4 meters wide, and 1.5 meters 
high. There were bones mixed in with the construction materials 
and Monsieur Thoulon, the ship's doctor on the Seigne!qy was 
able to dig out twenty skulls and two complete skeleton/ Nu-
.-
Cratere de Ronororaka, drawn by A. de Bar, after a sketch by Pinart. This 
drawing is of Rano Kau, not Rano Raraku. 
~erous little tumuli composed of carefully piled stones were dis-
tnbuted at regular intervals on the wall and what was remarkable 
about ~em was that, from a certain distance, they resembled 
crouching men . These tumuli, which were sometimes circular 
a~d sometimes pyramidal, had served as sepulchers . Ruins of 
ctr~ular and rectangular huts were distributed among these re-
mains; they were made of fragments of lava and their roofs 
most probably made of plant material, had disappeared entirely . 
Spaced at relatively large intervals over the entire area, there 
111 


--- Page 5 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
-~ 
were oval or circular pits of 1 or 2 meters in depth, with a di-
ameter of 3 to 12 meters. There was a wall around the mouth of 
each pit and, at the bottom, banana trees, sugar cane and Dra-
caena terminalis (known to the natives as tiz). The structure of 
these pits, which one might call deep gardens, can easily be ex-
plained by an examination of the soil, which is basically com-
posed of volcanic ash and decomposed lava and is, thus, very 
porous and unable to retain the moisture required for growing 
plants. To overcome this problem, it was necessary for the na-
tives to dig down to a certain level to reach the moisture that is 
indispensable for plant growth. Perhaps, also, the people who 
built the pits were trying to protect their plants from the inces-
sant high winds that blow in from the sea and have such a de-
structive influence on the vegetation . 
On one side of the circular wall around each pit there was gen-
erally an opening that faced towards the south and permits entry 
into a chamber built of stones that probably served as a dwell-
mg. 
Between the Ronororaka volcano and La Perouse Bay, the 
ground is not altogether flat but there is no significant high 
ground . The rain had not stopped all morning and we made our 
way with some difficulty through tall verbena-type plants, a few 
mimosa bushes and some kind of gramineous grass that formed 
the meager undergrowth beneath the larger plants . From a short 
distance away, we heard some characteristic grunts and soon we 
found ourselves in the presence of a herd of pigs that seemed 
completely indifferent to the rain. These animals, whose antece-
dents had probably been brought to the island by the missionar-
ies and Dutrou-Bornier, had become very numerous and en-
tirely wild. Commandant Lafontaine and Monsieur Berryer were 
unable to resist their desire to test their skills at the expense of 
these inoffensive beasts and they killed one of them. The natives 
are very afraid of the wild pigs and never go hunting for them. 
Moreover, they make no effort at all to domesticate them. 
112 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
There are quite a number of cows, sheep and horses . One 
should add also the common rat, which has proliferated all over 
the countryside, and a few small rabbits 3 that are mainly fauna 
on the island. 
As we con?11ued on our way we saw, rising on our right, the 
tops of Pw and Toatoa, one with its horizontal summit that re-
sembled a ~able and the other which was pyramidal in shape. T 0 
the left, Poike stretched out into the distance and in front of us 
was the Ronororaka volcano at whose base we arrived and 
~hich we then st~rted to climb. The slopes were quite steep and 
difficult to negot1ate; they were also very slippery as a result of 
the rain, which never let up. Nonetheless , within an hour we had 
reached the crater and its statues. 
Extending for six hundred meters in greatest diameter, the oval 
crater of Ronororaka has a shallow slope that extends for eighty 
to a hundred meters. It is covered with waist-high verbena-like 
grass and the center is carpeted with reeds and phragmites that 
flourish among puddles of sulfurous water . 
As we moved towards a sort of shelter beneath a rock that we 
had made out from a distance and where we hoped to set up 
camp, we came upon the first statues. There were about forty of 
them, spread out over the interior face of the crater in three 
separate groups, all facing north. They were all very similar; 
many were lying down; and one had been completely carved but 
had not yet been detached from the rock. From where we were 
the volcano rose up as a steep cliff of about two hundred mete:s 
in height - the maximum height of the volcano. Monsieur Es-
cande busied himself taking measurements with his theodolite. 
T~e mountain itself is made of trachytic (volcanic) rock, mixed 
with a larg~ quantity of gray and porous rock, a sort of amalgam 
o~ ash and igneous rock. Many statues are composed of this 
mixed rock but some of them are composed entirely of trachytic 
rock. 
113 


--- Page 6 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
After we had made our way up the slippery and lichen-covered 
path to the summit, using both hands and feet to hoist ourselves 
over the rocks , we were able to see that the slope that was to the 
southeast of the summit was covered with statues at various 
stages of completion. 
Looking at the vast open-air studio for the production of giant 
statues - some quite finished, some in the process of being 
carved, and some close to completion - we were able to figure 
out how the work had been done and how the statues had been 
erected and set in place after they had been made. At first 
glance, this problem appears to be extremely difficult to solve 
Ronororaka. - Interieur du vo!can. - Versant sud-est du vo!can, drawn by A. de Bar , 
after a sketch by Pinart . 
and the erection of these statues has astonished visitors to the 
island and become the source of many hypotheses . The method 
was, however, extremely simple. 
The sculptors always chose, as the site at which they would 
carve out a statue, a rock that was located on a fairly steep slope. 
114 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
The y carved the statue out of the slope itself and they cut it 
loose only when it was finished. To detach the statue, they had 
to make a myriad of small parallel channels of about eight centi-
meters in diameter beneath the statue , as we were able to see. 
Once the statue had been detached from the mother rock it was 
, 
easy to slide statue down the natural slope to the site where it 
was to be erected. The ground there would already have been 
prepared by digging a hole that would enclose the statue as far 
as the torso, leaving the 
remainder above the 
ground . Then, very 
gradually, without the 
use of excessive force, 
the statue would be 
raised with the help of 
fragments of rock that 
were pushed under it, 
forming an inclined 
plane or, more accu-
rately, an enormous an-
gle of which the widest 
part corresponded to the 
head, which was raised 
and stabilized in this 
way. Then the pit was 
filled up, the inclined 
plane of rocks was taken 
down, and the statue was 
left standing free and 
clear. 
The largest of the stat-
ues that we saw, situated 
Statued Ronororoka, drawn by A. de Bar, after 
a sketch by Pinart. Th e eyes of the glum look-
ing statue are the result of the artist's 
imagination. 
on the southeast slope , was seven meters high from the chest 
up. On the side of the volcano, near the statues, just as at other 
sites on the island where there are statues , we found a large 
number of obsidian blades, carved into the shape of scrapers, 
115 


--- Page 7 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
knives and spearheads etc. Could these be the tools with which 
the statues had been carved? Even if this suggestion might seem 
surprising at first, it does seem plausible especially if one recalls 
the limited hardness of the rock and the ease with which it can 
be worked. 
--
-
-- '3"" 
Rt,ine d'une a/lee pavie. -
Environs de Hotuiti, drawn by A. de Bar, after a sketch 
by Pinart. Where this might have been is unclear . 
The incessant rain forced us to shelter in the cavern that we had 
found originally . It was clear that this cavern had been carved 
out in the process of removing a giant statue from the rock it-
self; on each side, as well as behind the head, the sculptors had 
dug out a kind of circular corridor that would have allowed 
them to work more easily on the statue . 
Monsieur Lafontaine had set off with the Kanaks from the 
other side of the volcano, towards Hotuiti, and had found a 
more commodious shelter and, at the end of the day, we went to 
set up our camp there. Just like the first one, this grotto had 
been carved out in the process of separating a statue from the 
rock. Very close by, to our right, another statue had barely 
emerged; others, spread out further away, standing or lying 
down, surrounded our shelter. 
After collecting some water from a crevice in the rock, set up 
our table in front of the statue and chosen where to lay our 
heads, we lit a fire of branches at the entrance to the grotto. Be-
116 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
low us, the steep cliff was lost in the shadows of the night; to 
our left, a rough sea roared and the fevered noise of the waves 
was mixed with the howling of the wind and rain. Opposite, far 
away, the interior of the island appeared vaster and darker, with 
its clusters of mimosa and mulberry trees bent by the storm. Be-
hind us, the back of the cave was illuminated by the campfire 
whose glow flickered over the statues and created the impres-
Campement sur le Ronororaka, drawn by A. de Bar, after a sketch by Pinart. This 
was the place where Pinart and his companion s set up camp on the quarry 
slope s. From S. Chauvet 1934, Figur e 43. 
sion of a troupe of monstrous phantoms, awakened by the 
sound of our footsteps or, more likely, a gathering of the spirits 
from Vahou, 4 who had been conjured up by us to explain the 
mysteries of a race of giants that had disappeared. Even though 
we were tired, for a long time we were unable to stop gazing at 
the fantastic apparitions that evaporated as the last sparks in our 
hearth died down. 
At daybreak, we decided to return to the place that we had stud-
ied the day before and we took the path to the left, from which 
117 


--- Page 8 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
we could look out over the Hotuiti plain , with its ruined village, 
deep gardens, huts and tumuli . On the right of the slope that we 
were climbing, we came to an immense bust that must have 
been part of a statue that broke while it was being moved . We 
could see there most clearly how the statues were carved be-
cause the rock had been hollowed out for a length of about 4 
meters and a width of 2.25 meters . Very nearby, two statues 
Restauration du pakaopa d'Opulu, drawn by A. de Bar, after a sketch by Pinart. 
This conjectur al recon struction bears little relation to the actual site. 
were lying parallel to each other: one had been carved out of the 
rock but not detached; the other had already been completed 
and had the following dimensions: height of the forehead, 2.0 
meters; length of the nose , 3.40 meters; distan ce from the nose 
to the lips, 0.75 meters; height of the chin, 2 meters; and length 
of the bod y, 12 meters. 
In the same direction and at the summit of a veritable amphi -
theater, surrounded by a dry-stone wall, was a third statue lying 
on its back, still intimately attached to the rock and extending 
beyond it for about four meters. 
118 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
The left side of this amphitheater had a cross-shaped engraving 
of two signs, one representing a kind of bird and the other rep-
resenting a person, while on the right side was a bust with the 
following measurements: height of the forehead, 1.25 meters; 
length of the nose, 2.80 meters; length of the mouth and the 
chin, 1.75 meters; length of the rest of the body 8.50 meters. 
This bust, which had been raised on a type of altar, was notable 
for several unique features, namely, a line of tattooing composed 
of little raised circles on the nose and the entire length of the 
&tines du pakaopa d'Opulu, drawn by A. de Bar, after a sketch by Pinart. 
"Opulu " may be the ahu at Akahanga. 
bod y. The body itself was covered in sculpted bands and behind 
the head we collected a few calcified bones , which suggested 
that the statue might have been the focus of some ancient cult. 
The head of the large statue at our campsite also had traces of 
tattoos that seemed to have been painted in red on its nose and 
chin . 
A short distance from where we were standing was another 
natural amphitheater , identical to the first and close to other 
119 


--- Page 9 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
groups of statues that numbered eighty in all. These statues are 
upright and differ from those in the interior of the crater only 
insofar as they have longer noses or thicker lips. In various 
places we found a type of paved path, bordered by carved 
stones of 1.20 meters in length, 15 centimeters high and 10 cen-
timeters thick, with small round openings incised along a me-
dian line. Perhaps they were also involved in ceremonies associ-
ated with the cult of the 
primitive islanders . 
On the morning of April 4, 
we left Ronororaka and, 
guided by two Kanacs who 
had rejoined our men on 
the previous day, we 
crossed the Hutuiti plain 
and headed for Toatoa 
along a path that was cov-
ered with rocky debris and 
along which ran ditches in 
which banana trees and tii 
grew. The coastline that 
~ 
Plan de !'ttne des chambres sepu!cra!e
s dtt pakaopa 
d'Optt!tt, drawn by A. de Bar after a sketch 
by Pinart . These stones are foundations for 
a bo at house (hare paenga), not a tomb. 
the maps indicate as being relatively smooth is, however, inter-
rupted by numerous little inlets into which the sea crashes with 
tremendous force. One of them, half way between Cape Atama 
.and Cape Kai-Kai, is called Opulu 5 by the islanders. 
On the left side of this inlet and before one arrives at the paka-
opcf:, or terrace that we will discuss shortly, we first saw a pillar of 
red lava that was still upright and around which blocks of rocks 
had been piled up, with evidence on the south side of a crude 
engraving of a head. In addition, we found the crowns or head-
dresses of the statues from the pakaopa, which had rolled this far 
when the statues had been pushed over. The y consisted of cylin-
ders of red lava and were partl y buried in the ground. It seems 
plausible that they had been balanced on the heads of the stat-
ues, which are generally flat. These cylinders were seventy to 
120 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
eighty centimeters high, with a diameter of fifty to sixty centime-
ters. 
The pakaopa was built on a small, slightly elevated promontory, 
against which the waves were breaking. In ruins today, this ter-
race must have been a platform of 50 meters high, 200 meters 
long and 10 meters wide .7 Its sides were inclined and were made 
of slabs that had been cut without great skill. The interior, as far 
as we could tell, was filled with fragments of rocks . Above it was 
built a second terrac~ that was 5 meters wide, 1.70 meters high 
and 1.50 meters long, built out of big slabs laid down side by 
side. On the lower part of these slabs, there was a trou gh into 
which fitted a sculpted ledge, also made of red lava and 1 .40 me-
ters long by 70 centimeters high, the perfectly flat face of which 
was decorated in bas relief with figures that had been rather 
finely carved. 8 
The deteriorated state of these ruins allowed us to make draw-
ings only with the greatest difficulty . However, on one of the 
ruins it was clearly possible to make out the shapes of skulls. 
The side of the ledge that faced the sea carried no traces of any 
decoration. The statues were standing in the space between the 
two platforms . The interior of the terrace contained burial 
chambers of quite considerable size, made of slabs placed one 
on top of the other, such that the ones on the top sealed each 
sarcophagus hermetically . The chambers were, on average, 2 
meters long and 80 centimeters wide . A rather large number of 
cadavers seemed to have been placed there in no particular or-
der. 
These tombs are ancient . Today the islanders take advantage, as 
we noted above, of any place that they can find to bury their 
dead, sometimes putting the bodies under fallen statues, some-
times in the pakaopas, and they content themselves with just re-
moving a few stones to make space for the bod y. Placed on the 
wider lower terrace, the statues faced away from the upper ter-
race . However, this position was not typical of all the terraces 
121 


--- Page 10 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
since we saw some on which the statues faced in the opposite 
direction, that is to say, towards the interior of the island. 
The workmanship of these statues was much cruder than that of 
the statues at Ronororaka . They had just been carved to indicate 
the curve of the forehead and the flat surfaces of the nose. The 
eyes were marked by two slits below the forehead and concen~ 
tric and parallel lines simulated a type of tattooing . Basically, the 
statues were flat. Moreover, they were made from a rock that 
was quite different from that of the volcanoes. This rock.con-
sisted of compacted volcanic rock, within in which there were 
aggregates of pieces of lava and gravel. It was very friable and it 
must have been carved in situ very close to the terraces them-
selves. The rock appeared to have been formed relatively re-
cently and it is likely that, given its extreme fragility, the rock will 
not withstand the destructive forces of the islands climate for 
much longer. 9 
To the right of this pakaopa, there was a fallen statue of the same 
type and the same rock as those in the crater at Ronororaka. On 
top of the terrace there were more of the little piles of stones of 
the type already described. We found them, basically, all over 
the place. Platforms, tumuli and elevated sites were all covered 
with them and they formed an impressive display that resembled 
an army of crouching men. All these remnants of the past were 
found in abundance on the south coast, with every point that 
looked out over the sea havingpakaopas. We kept coming across 
tumuli and, on all sides, piles of rocks covered the remains of 
dead islande~s. We were in the center of a vast necropolis and 
we wondered what kind of people had made up this huge popu-
lation, what forces had led to the extinction of these tribes - one 
might even say these powerful tribes, if we judge them by the 
gigantic monuments that they have left behind to mark their 
stay on this earth. 
The present inhabitants of the Easter Island, as we had seen, 
had retained no memory at all of those who had come before 
122 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
them. This total absence of traditions suggests, perhaps, that the 
sculptors of long ago might not even have been the ancestors of 
the present-day Kanacs and that these generations had disap-
peared entirely, perhaps because of insufficient space on the is-
land, perhaps as a result of emigration, perhaps even as a result 
of destruction by an invasion by Polynesians, from which the 
natives at Vahou appeared to have been descended. 
A vast and undulating plain extends from the Opulu inlet as far 
as the interior plateaus of the island, at the base of Ronororaka. 
This broad area is dens,ely covered with grass and serves as a 
rich pasture for flocks of sheep. 
The distance from the pakaopa of Opulu to Vahou, where we 
had just arrived, might be about 10 kilometers. There are few 
remains of Kanae villages in this part of the island: a few dry-
stone walls of 1.00 to 1.25 meters in height, arranged in circles 
or quadrangles, are the only indications left of the sites of earlier 
homes. Nonetheless, these walls remain intact. 
The mission church is a vast building made of planks from the 
United States, capable of holding six hundred people. On the 
left of the church, a wall surrounds two little houses and a gar-
den. One of the little houses is made of wood, the other has 
dry-stone walls. In the garden, which has been abandoned, there 
are a few vines, some fig trees, some Chinese peonies that are 
thriving as well as they might in their native soil. We guessed 
that it was in this part of the island that Dutrou-Bornier had set-
tled to rear his barnyard animals before he went to live in 
Mataveri . We had six more kilometers to cover before reaching 
this last village. 
We continued our journey along an easily passable dirt track, 
gaining height gradually and leaving, to our right, fields of ba-
nana trees and sugar cane. The ground everywhere was covered 
with the kinds of grass that we had seen in the valley. The ver-
bena-type plants became rarer and the Ranakau volcano rose up 
123 


--- Page 11 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
on our left. Its southwest slope is known as the district of 
Vinapu. It is a fertile region where crops should be very success-
ful. Leaving Orito and Tarai to our left, we reach the central axis 
of the island, from which we could see the masts of the Seignelqy 
on our right and the village of Mataveri on our left, where 
French flags were floating in the breeze. 
When we were about two kilometers from the village, almost all 
the inhabitants came out to meet us. Their cries of ia-ora-na were 
deafening. They were carrying bananas, which they distributed 
among us; they relieved our men of their loads to carry them 
themselves, and they took us directly to the home of the queen. 
She was wearing a wide piece of tapa cloth, 10 in the Tahitian 
manner; a panama hat, and a piece of Scottish plaid around her 
shoulders. In bare feet, standing between her daughters, she was 
waiting for us at the door of her home. She had an intelligent 
face, which was framed by long hair that had been cut carefully 
above her ears. She took off her hat gravely with both hands to 
respond to our greetings, extended her hand and introduced her 
two daughters to us. The older girl, a child of five or six, resem-
bled a Neapolitan, with large pensive black eyes and long brown 
hair, crowned with a tiara of shiny base metal, the decoration of 
some wooden statue of a saint that the missionaries had taken 
away with them. Her mother explained that this daughter was, in 
fact, the queen and that she, her mother, was only acting as re-
gent. 
The second daughter, with dark chestnut hair, looked more like 
an exile from a Paris neighborhood, abandoned far from home, 
than like the offspring of a European and a Kanae. 
We asked the regent if it would be possible for us to have a 
place to stay and she replied, with an eloquent gesture, by point-
ing to the house of Dutrou -Bornier, indicating in this way that 
she was putting it at our disposal. The entire village was assem-
bled in the interior courtyard. A kind of major domo with a ba-
ton in his hand seemed to be maintaining order . Upon the invi-
124 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
tation of the regent, we entered her house and the second part 
of our reception program began. A sofa and some chairs were 
brought. The regent took her place between her two daughters. 
Once these formalities had been completed, she had us under-
stand that she was offering us a sheep for dinner and that she 
expected to share it with us. 
Soon it was dinnertime. The regent took her place among us. 
During the entire meal, she kept repeating that her daughters 
were called Caroline aq.d Hariette, that her name was Koreto, 
and that her two children looked very much like their father, 
Dutrou-Bornier. She also told us that all the cows, sheep and 
goats on the island belonged· to her and she was putting them at 
our disposal. She asked us not to touch the chickens since they 
were the exclusive property of the Kanacs and she also told us 
that all the pigs that we might encounter ought to be killed. 
She imitated our table manners and copied every gesture, drink-
ing and eating as we did; saying Mereti (merci = thank you) when 
she was served. She insisted that the knives and forks that she 
and her daughters used be changed, banging impatiently on the 
table when the sailor who was serving us did not follow her or-
ders sufficiently promptly. It was very strange to observe the 
gestures and behavior of this native queen, now the regent of 
Easter Island, as she made an effort to imitate French customs, 
combining the ignorance of her primitive background with the 
inherent demands of her title - a combination that, given her 
exalted rank, was simultaneously both laughable and sad. 
After the meal, Koreto revealed the cause of the death of 
Dutrou -Bornier, which had occurred in August 1876. Just as the 
Kanacs had told us on our arrival, his death had followed a fall 
from his horse. Before he died, the colonialist captain had 
burned his papers, bequeathed all his property to the queen and 
her daughters, and distributed his clothing among the most im-
portant Kanacs in the village. Koreto told us how much she and 
her people wished to come under French protection, and she 
did not disguise her aversion for the Chileans, the Americans 
125 


--- Page 12 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
and the Germans - an aversion shared, moreover, we must im-
mediately add, by the island notables who were present during 
this conversation. She begged us to write several letters to Tahiti 
and also to write to the captain of the Seignelqy asking him to 
come the next day. 
~ 
.-~
'--< 
Riception de M. A . Pinart par la reine de !'fie de Paques. Drawin g by E. Bayard, 
after text and phot ograph s. From S. Chauvet, 1934, Figure A. 
At eight o'clock we left the regent, who had arranged a room for 
us, and we settled down for the night, waiting impatiently for 
the return of daylight. 
The next day, Koreto took us to the grave of Dutrou -Bornier, 
which was located on a little rise to the left of the village, beside 
a flagpole up which a French flag had been hoisted . There, 
crouching on the ground, with tears in her voice, she asked us 
for a cross to put on the grave of the man who had linked her 
life with his and whose death she now mourned . 
Later, leaving the regent to her pain and accompanied by Mon-
sieur Thoulon, we set off a second time towards V aihu, where 
we planned to excavate a pakaopa. This pak aopa was very similar 
126 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
in all respects to the ones that we have already described. Under 
the statues, which were lying down, their faces resting on the 
upper side of the terrace, there were two bodies that were still 
wrapped in straw matting, which had been secured at both ends. 
The bodies had been placed in the open space below the statues. 
This space was enclosed by a dry-stone wall. Monsieur Lafon-
taine had left us to go and visit Kaou and to record the main 
features, while Monsieur Berryer had stayed in the village to 
photograph representative natives with the most characteristic 
features . 
In order to transport our finds more easily, the sailors who had 
come with us got the idea of stringing together the skulls and 
bones and then, after distributing them among themselves , they 
hung them around their necks like necklaces. You have never 
seen anything as unusual and picturesque than the sight of our 
fine sailors gravely wearing this new type of decoration, walking 
ahead of us in their funereal attire towards the village. However, 
since we were afraid of scaring the Kanacs, we decided to make 
a detour around Mataveri and to head towards the port of 
Hanga Piko, where we would hide our booty until the following 
day under the rocks and ruins. 
In spite of our precautions , the natives had caught sight of us 
and we were absolutely astonished when, a little while later, they 
came up to us carrying all kinds of bones, which they gave us 
willingly in exchange for a little tobacco . 
The village of Mataveri consists of about thirty huts, all built 
along the same lines and forming a rectangle that surrounds the 
village square. The home of Dutrou-Bornier, now occupied by 
the queen, is on the left. The huts are mostl y made of wood 
from shipwrecks and resemble huts in Europe except in so far 
as they lack windows. The y have one opening, which serves as 
the door, which is 60 to 80 centimeters high. A few ancient reed 
huts, also with very small entrances, can also still be seen at this 
site. 
127 


--- Page 13 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
Dutrou-Bornier had built himself a home of the type favored 
by planters in the Southern states, surrounded by a vast veran-
dah around which a vigorous growth of vines was entwined. On 
one side there were iron receptacles for drinking water. The gar-
den was divided into squares, with paths bordered by arbors 
made of vines. It was full of fig trees, almond trees, peach trees 
and mulberry trees, all of which were flourishing. Behind his 
house, Dutrou-Bornier had planted a vast plantation of vines 
and in front of it, he had planted the finest sugar cane that we 
had seen on the island . 
Not far from the village, in the little inlet of Hanga Pico, the ac-
cess to which is difficult and which is entered via a narrow chan -
nel bordered by rocks, Dutrou -Bornier had built a small harbor 
where he could safely anchor the two-masted sailing boat that 
he had built for his excursions in the coastal waters of the is-
land . Dutrou-Bornier must have been a man of remarkable en-
ergy who had been blessed with many talents, as was obvious 
from his efforts among these wild people. He had cultivated the 
inhospitable soil; induced useful plants to prosper; raised horses, 
cows and sheep; and succeeded in all these endeavors as a result, 
exclusively, of his unquenchable spirit. 
The extent of his success suggests that future colonization 
should be both advantageous and inevitable. He was a friend to 
the Kanacs, on whose support he could count . However, his ef-
forts made some people angry and it seems that the missionar-
ies, far from encouraging him and offering him a useful collabo-
ration that he would certainly have accepted immediately, be-
came hostile towards him. The struggle did not last long: helped 
by his friends the Kanacs, Dutrou-Bornier was the victor and 
the missionaries had to leave the island. Their converts followed 
them and almost all of them went to live in Tahiti. 
The average height of the native men on the Easter Island is 
1.57 meters and that of the women is 1.52 meters . Their chest is 
narrow and slightly concave, the clavicles are prominent, the 
128 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
head is relatively elongated, the forehead is non-protruding, the 
cheekbones are moderately prominent, the nose is rather slender 
with fairly wide nostrils, the lips are thick, the eyes are black, 
lively and expressive, and the skin is a bronzed brown. Even 
though they are not very muscular, they are able to carry fairly 
heavy loads on their heads. We saw Old Tago carry, in this way, 
a sack weighing about 35 kilograms from Ronororaka to 
Mataveri. These people are indefatigable walkers. Many of them 
have, on the nape of the neck, a large callus. 
In all, the population consists of only 111 men, women and chil-
dren. Their diet, which is basically vegetarian and is composed 
almost exclusively of bananas and a type of watermelon, proba-
bly contributes to their weak constitutions. The men exhibit re-
markable sobriety. They obstinately refuse any alcohol, even 
wine. By contrast, they are very keen to acquire European 
clothes and tobacco. The conduct of the women is irreproach-
able. We only counted 26 in the entire population. Both the men 
and the women demonstrate their great affection for their chil-
dren. It is not unusual to see men acting as the most devoted 
caretakers of their seven- or eight-month-old infants. 
Almost everyone is dressed in European clothes but some, 
nonetheless, only have a type of jacket or overcoat around their 
shoulders and a piece of cloth between their thighs. Only one 
old man, Tago, had a full-body and very complex tattoo. Most 
of the women had tattooed faces. The designs consist of a circu-
lar blue line that extends from the temples almost to the eye-
brows and ends near the center of the forehead, at the hairline. 
It is accompanied on the outer sides by a series of blue dots and 
another line, also blue, surrounds the mouth. Another type of 
tattoo represents a stone ax with a handle. The end of the han-
dle starts at the ear lobe. The ax is drawn on the cheek such that 
the blade extends to the outer angle of the eye. 
The ear lobe, which is pierced, hangs down to the level of the 
chin and is horribly deformed. The entire contours of the hole, 
129 


--- Page 14 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
and the cartilage, are decorated with a line of blue dots. Circular 
tattoos surround both the wrist and the ankle . Women wear 
their hair back in a chignon . The queen and her daughters have 
long hair and Koreto is the only woman without any tattoos 
apart from those around her lips and wrists . 
In addition to the monuments that we have described, there are 
other objects of great interest on the island, namely, the wooden 
tablets and wooden staffs which other travelers have mentioned 
and which are engraved with remarkable hieroglyphics .11 Many 
examples of these carvings, which are very rare today, are pre -
served at the museum in Santiago . Easter Island is the only 
Polynesian island on which such tablets have been found and 
they are very likely the work of the same people as the ones that 
erected the monumental statues. The signs on talking wood, as it 
is called by the islanders, are indecipherable by the present-day 
islanders . The very occasional tablets that one comes across are 
used by the natives to spool the cord that they use for fishing 
lines or nets and it is to this use that is responsible for the sur-
vival of such tablets as remain . 
Many of the islanders wear small statuettes, generall y carved 
from a type of mimosa 12 that is quite common on the island. 
They value these statuettes highly, as we found when we tried , 
with difficulty, to get them to exchange them for tobacco. The 
figures represent both males and females. 13 The Kanacs store 
them in little bags made of linen or cotton fabric. Some of the 
statuettes have necklaces and a huge head of carefully arranged 
hair. There are also statuettes made of stone that are exact 
miniature reproductions of the statues in the crater . The Kanacs 
have, in addition, a crescent shape ornament - a kind of neck 
guard 14 - whose purpose we were unable to determine. 
At a little distance from Mataveri, we were able to study a little 
pakaopa that supported statues that had been barely completed. 
There, as at Opulu, there had been some that had been better 
finished than others, for example , the one whose head La Flore 
130 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
removed in 1872 and that is now deposited amon g the anthro-
pological riches of the Paris Museum. Another terrace, without 
statues, can be found near the launch site at Hanga Pico . 
Ornement en forme de croissant. Drawin g by A. de Bar, after a sketch by Pinart. 
This appears to be the Oslo #243 7 rei-miro . Cf: The Art of E aster Island by T. 
Heyerdahl , 1976; Plates 47b and 48a. 
On April 6, we set off to see the Ranakau volcano, which 
O'Higgins officers estimated to be 408 meters high. Monsieur 
Escande, for his part, set off towards Tauatapu, 15 the site from 
which the natives carved the cylindrical hats of the statues and 
where he saw a considerable number that had already been com-
pleted. 
The crater of Ranakau, which we reached after a painful trek, 
has very steep interior slopes, covered with fallen rocks, which 
make access difficult. It was eight hundred meters deep and fif-
teen hundred meters wide . A spiraling path leads to the bottom, 
which is full of reed -covered ponds. 16 The south part of the cra-
ter forms a cliff that falls verticall y to the sea. Standing on a site 
that was a mere 75 centimeters wide between the edges of the 
cliff and the crater, we could see, at our feet, the needle-shaped 
island of Mota Nui. 17 On the sides of the crater, there were nu-
merous dracena plants, fems, a type of acacia with yellow flowers, 
a large clump of locust trees, and a considerable number of lage-
naria vines . Approximatel y in the center of the narrow space on 
which we stood, we thought we could make out some traces of 
131 


--- Page 15 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
an inscription on a rock but we were unable to decipher it. 
another opening, covered with flat slabs of stone provided fresh 
air or served as a chimney. In front of the opening that served as 
an entrance, the ground was flattened and swept clean. On each 
side walls made of stone formed the facade of these subterra-
, 
' 
nean chambers. 
Having finished our explorations of the volcano, we returned at 
2.00 p.m. to Mataveri. With respect to agricultural produ ction 
on Easter Island, suffice to say that apart from a few domestic 
animals and the rare plant species that we have mentioned, there 
is nothing to catch the attention of a naturalist. However, we 
must emphasize the fertility of certain parts of the island where 
the useful plants introduced by Dutrou-Bornier have prospered 
quite remarkably. We should repeat what some travelers have 
said also namely that the future of this island rests with the ex-
, 
, 
ploitation of the wine industry and tobacco, as well as bananas, 
sugar cane and dracena . 
132 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
We still had one duty to perform. A little while after our return 
to the village, our men brought a cross for the grave of Dutrou-
Bornier, as Koreto had requested. After we had bowed our 
heads in front of the silent grief and grateful looks of the poor 
queen of the Kanacs, we made our final farewells. A short while 
later, we were on our way to the shores of Poumotu and Tahiti. 
Left : Statuette en bois, drawn by A. de Bar after a sketch by Pinart. These fig-
ures are shown in Stephen Chauvet 's book , I'!e de Paques et ses Mysteres. Figure 
at right is a drawing by A. de Bar after a photograph . They appears to repre-
sent the same image, only the one on the right lacks the hair. Covering the 
genitals with cloth is not traditional. 
Endnotes 
1 April 1
st
, 1877. Pinart arrived on the Seigne!qy along with Commandant La-
fontaine , Captain Aube, and the photographer Berryer; they departed 
on 6 April 1877. 
2 The Reverend Father Mouly, in his book "Ile de Paques, Ile de lvfys-
tere?" (Libraire de l'Oeu vre St-Charles, Bruges, Belgium, 1935, p. 147), 
133 


--- Page 16 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
writes of the death of Dutrou-Bornier 
as follows: 'This version, circu-
lated for the benefit of foreigners, hides a tragedy. The exasperated 
population had responded to violence with more violence; the islanders 
had killed the foreigner by stabbing him with his own bayonette." In a 
footnote , Mouly adds, "According to Father Bienvenido, a man called 
Papiano appears to have protected the two little daughters of Dutrou-
Bornier from the wratl1 of his compatriots by hiding them in his oven. " 
3 Who brought rabbits to the island is unknown , but they were apparently 
eaten to extinction before they could multipl y. 
4 Vaihu? 
5 From the description and genera l location, this must be Akahanga. 
6 Sebastian Eng lert's Idioma Rapanui states that "pakeopa: no era nombre 
generico por moai , ni de cierto tipo de moai, como creen algunos 
autores, sino nombre propio de un moai de piedra que fue llevado de la 
isla y que en el dorso tenia varias figuras (tres rona y dos ua). Actualment 
dan, en general, el nombre de pakaopa a estatuillas de madera o piedra , 
adomadas con figuras en el dorso" (page 218). The word does not ap-
pear in the Rapanui dictionary by Jordi Fuentes. From the way the word 
is used by Pinart, he is describing ahu. This could be a misunderstanding; 
he may have pointed to an ahu and asked what it was, and his informant 
thought he meant a statue. 
7 The heading of the printed text from which this translation was made indi-
cates that the text was not edited. The cited dimensions of the pakaopa 
would have benefited from the attention of an editor with access to the 
actual dimensions, as recorded by Pinart . The dimensions given are not 
possible. 
8 The description suggests this may be the ahu at Akahanga with its red scoria 
facings that contain petrog lyphs, although the actual designs do not re-
semble the drawings made by Pinart (see Lee 1992: Figure 4.130). Later, 
Pinart states this site "might be about ten km" from Vaihu, but anyone 
walking this rocky coast might be forgiven for overestimating the dis-
tance. Pinart's map as shown in Chauvet (Figure 4) shows "Opulu" at 
about the position of Akahanga ("Opulu" was hand-written 
on the 
map). 
9 The differences noted by Pinart were due to weathering of the stone. 
10 The term used by Pinart is ''gaule" and appears to refer to tapa cloth . Gau/er 
means to beat (trees) with a long pole. As the islanders beat the mahute 
bark (with a wood beater ) to make a tapa, Pinart likely used this term to 
describe a garment made ofbarkcloth, "in the Tahitian manner" . 
11 F.ongorongo 
is a pictographic form of writing on small wood tablets. It is 
unique in the Pacific. 
12 S ophora toromiro, now extinct on the island. See Zizka 1993. 
13 The male figures are called moai kavakava-, the female are moaipa'a pa'a. See 
Kurze 1997. 
134 
Voyage to Easter Island - 1877 
14 This ornament, worn around the neck is known as "rei-miro". Crescent-
shaped pendant s are known iliroughout ilie Pacific and were status sym-
bol s. 
1s Puna Pau, ilie topknot quarry. 
16 The lake at Rano Kau has matted vegetation on its surface, giving the ap-
pearance of "ponds" . 
17 The needle-shaped islet is Motu Kao Kao; Motu Nui is ilie largest in ilie 
group of three islets off the souiliwest coast of ilie island. 
135 


--- Page 17 ---
Alphonse Pinart 
R EFERENGES 
Chauvet, Stephen. 1935. L 'fle de Paques et ses Mysteres. Editions "Tel", 
Paris. 
Englert, Sebastian. 1978. Idioma Rapanui. Gramatica y Diccionario de! an-
tiguo idioma de la Isla de Pascua. Ediciones de la Universidad de 
Chile. 
Fischer, Steven R. 1994. Ship's Surgeon R. Guthrie's Account of a 
Calling at Rapanui Aboard HMS Seringapatam on 6 March 1830. 
Rapa Nui Journal 8(3):63-66. 
Kurze, Joan Seaver. 1997. Ingrained Images. Wood Carvings from Easter 
Island. Los Osos: Easter Island Foundation. 
Lee, Georgia. 1992. The Ratk Art of Easter Island. Symbols of Power, 
Prqyers to the Gods. Monumenta Archaeologica 17. Los Angeles: 
The Institute of Archaeology, University of California. 
Mouly, Reverend. 1935. I'ile de Paques, fie de Mysteri? Bruges, Belgium: 
Libraire de l'Oeuvre St-Charles. 
Zizka, Georg. 1993. Rapanui Flora: Needs and Possibilities for Con-
servation. Easter Island Studies. Contributions to the History of Rapanui 
in Memory of William T Mullqy. Steven Roger Fischer, ed. Oxbow 
Monograph 32, Oxford. pp. 46-49. 
136 
APPENDIX 
The following chart lists known ship arrivals to Easter Island 
from 1722-1879. This clearly shows that Rapa Nui was not so 
isolated in historic times as might be imagined. Where the infor -
mation is available, we have indicated which were whalers, but 
many more probably were in that category also. While few ships 
spent much time on the island, there was trading going on, and 
contact with the islanders was occurring, at various levels. Many 
ships "sighted" the island but either chose not to land, or were 
unable to land due to high surf or hostile gestures from the Ra-
panui. We chose to stop the list at 1879 when there is one last 
mention of Roussel returning to the island. Our thanks to Grant 
McCall for permission to use this portion of his publication. 
Captain 
Ship 
Date Remarks 
Jaco b Roggeveen 
Den Armd; Thienhoven; 1722 
landed/ departed 9 April 
Af ricaa11sche 
Ga!ry 
Do n Felipe Gon-
Sa11 Lorenzo; Santa 
1770 
Nov . 20-21 
zalez 
Rosalia 
Jame s Coo k 
Reso!11tio11; 
Advent11re 
1774 
March 15-17 Johann Forster, 
Anders Sparrman 
Geo rg Forster 
J.F.G. Compte de 
Astrolabe 
1786 
landed/ departed 10 April 
La Perou se 
Jam es Baker 
Jew!Y 
1792 
no details known 
Charles Bishop 
&,l!J 
1793 
visit inferred 
Charles Bishop 
&,l!J 
1795 
March 3-5 
Samuel Delano, 
Pilgrim, Perservera11ce 1801 
Jun e or July; unable to land 
A. Delano 
U. F. Lisiansky 
Neva 
1804 
April 16-24 
unkn own 
Na11ry 
1805 
American schooner; lidnapped 
12 men, 10 women 
J\. Adame 
Kako11ma11a 
1806 
unable to land 
B. Page 
Adventure 
1806 
unable to land 
D. Co ffin 
Thomas 
1807 
Whaler, unable to land 
Winship 
Albatross 
1809 
unable to land 
137 

