--- Page 1 ---
THE SOJOURN OF THE FIRST MISSIONARY ON 
RAPA Nm: EUGENE EYRAUD AMONG THE 
KANACS, 1864 
Translated by Ann M. Altman, 1 
with Judith Schwart z2 
B rother Eugene Eyraud was the fust missionary to work on 
Rapa Nui. ln December 1864 he wrote a letter from Val-
paraiso to the Very Reverend Father Superior of the Order of 
the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary in Paris, telling him about 
his experiences during his first visit to Rapa Nui.3 This letter 
has been summarized in many publications and, apparently, 
translated into Spanish . However , we know of no translation 
availab le in English and the absence of such a translation has 
deprived many of those interested in Rapa Nui of a charming 
and informative account of life on Rapa Nui in the middle of the 
nineteenth century. In November 2002, while assisting the cura-
tors of the museum in Hanga Roa, and as part of our contribu-
tion to an expedition organized by Earthwatch under the aus-
pices of Dr. Christopher Steven son, we came across the corre-
spondence of Brother Eugene and, upon learning that no Eng-
lish translation seemed to exist, we decided to take up the task 
ourselves. We believe that our efforts will be rewarded by the 
pleasure that this letter will give to those who are now able to 
read it. 
Using his own funds , Brother Eugene sailed from Tahiti to 
Rapa Nui, where he arrived on January 2 1864, according to a 
letter4 to the Father Superior in Pari s dated December 1864 
from Father Olivier , an official of the Order in Valparaiso: 
Brother Eugene made appropriate preparations for 
his voyage. He took several bolts of cloth with which 
to dress the natives, some carpenter's tools, various 
pieces of timber and wood with which to build a 
cabin, a barrel of flour, two or three catechisms and 
prayer books in Tahitian and, lastly, a bell with 
which to call the natives to prayer. ... He also took 
five sheep and some cuttings of trees that he hoped 
would adapt to the climate on Easter Island. During 
the voyage, he tried to learn a few words of the local 
dialect from the natives [four men, a woman and a 
child, who had been rescued after their capture by 
pirates] whom he was bringing back to the island and 
he became friendly with one of them, namely, Pana. 
It was agreed that they should disembark at Anakena , 
where Pana 's fami ly lived, to facilitate Father 
Eugene 's arrival on the island and his acceptance by 
its inhabitants. 
Then Father Olivier adds: 
But here we are, on the verge of landing on Easter 
Island, so let us hear what Brother Eugene has to say: 
On the twenty -fourth day of our journey , on January 2 
Rapa Nui Journal 
49 
1864, we caught our 
first 
glimpse 
of 
Easter Island , known 
as Rapa Nui to the 
islanders . The cap-
tain asked the island-
ers 
that 
we 
were 
bringing home with 
us 
whether 
they 
could see Anakena 
Bay, where I wished 
to disembark. After a 
few moments hesita-
tion, because of the 
distance
, 
they 
sho ut ed , 
"That 's 
Anakena ". 
The 
i sland 
looked very pleasant , 
especially after such 
a long 
voyage. 
It 
must 
be about 25 
Brother Eugene Eyraud 
kilometers long and 17 wide. In general , the coastline consists 
of precipitous rocky cliffs and there are few places where one 
can land easily . The landscape is much smoother than the cliffs, 
with three large "bosom-shaped " hills . From the top of these 
hills to the coast, the island is uniformly fertile. The same vege-
tation grows everywhere , with high grasses everywhere ; there 
are no trees or tall plants; there are deep gullies but no streams. 
Along the coast, there are three main bays where one can land: 
Anakena , in the north ; Anarova [Hangaroa] , in the northwe st; 
and Vahui [Vaihu] , in the south. But these bays, if one can call 
them that, offer no shelter to large vessels. 
When we arrived at Anakena , the captain suggested that it 
might not be a good place to land. In fact, his desire to dock 
elsewhere was associated with an ulterior motive. However , I 
was determined to land at Anakena and I insisted to the captain 
that he let me disembark there. He protested that my baggage 
would get soaked but I said that would be only a small problem 
for me and that it was important to let the Kanacs [islanders] 
disembark immediately so that they could introduce us to their 
compatriots and so that nobody would mistake us for pirate s. 
The captain appeared to give his consent and ordered that a 
rowboat be launched from the ship. The Kanacs prepared to get 
into the boat but, since I had developed a bad headache , I lay 
down on my bed to rest for a moment. I had hardly fallen asleep 
when I was awakened by the noise of the Kanacs, who, I had 
assumed, had already landed. I went up on deck and saw that 
we 
were 
heading 
for 
another 
point 
on 
the 
coast. 
"Where are you going to let me go ashore?" I asked the captain. 
"How am l going to be able to transport my belonging s from 
there to Anakena?" 
"Don 't worry," he answered , "For a gift of four pieces of 
cloth to the Kanacs , I'll make sure that your things are taken 
wherever you want." 
"That's fine," I replied , "But will you also guarantee that l 
won't be robbed on the way?" 
The captain said nothing, the boat continued on its way and, in 
the evening, we arrived at Anarova. After testing the depth of 
Vol. 17 (1) May 2003 


--- Page 2 ---
the water, the captain decided that it would be unwise to dock 
so we went out into the open sea for the night. 
The next day, which was a Sunday , we finally landed. 
The second in command on the ship was a young Mangarevan 
called Daniel who spoke some English and French and who 
seemed to be able to make himself understood by the natives , 
whose language bore many similarities to that of the Gambier 
Archipelago .5 He was given the job of taking the Kanacs 
ashore. He came back in a great hurry. Poor Daniel! He was 
beside himself. Even before corning back on board, he had an 
animated exchange with the captain, which I could not under-
stand because it was in English. What was wrong? 
"I won't go back there for a thousand piastres," he told 
me, "Those are horrible-looking people. They are threatening, 
armed with spears, and most of them are totally naked. They 
look even more terrifying because of the feathers that they are 
wearing as decoration , their tattoos , and their wild cries. And 
there is smallpox all over the island . Some of the men who 
came back from Peru brought it and the epidemic has spread 
everywhere except to Anakena ." 
In fact, of one hundred un-
fortunates who boarded a ship in 
Peru, only fifteen had escaped 
death and they had infected their 
compatriots. The Kanacs who 
knew of this disease were horri-
bly afraid of it. Daniel had heard 
them talk about it and, struck by 
the red complexions of the na-
tives, he thought it was an effect 
of the scourge, whose effects 
had, in fact, been exaggerated . 
Thus, Daniel , afraid of the dan-
ger to which he thought he had 
been exposed, alerted all those 
on board. 
"The captain," he added, 
"will take you back to Tahiti for 
free. You shouldn't dream of 
going ashore -
we might lose 
the rowboat and catch the dis-
ease." 
Soon I was on land and pulled up several clumps of grass 
that I put into the rowboat myself. Daniel' s trials were now 
over and off he went. Mine were just beginning : there I was in 
the midst of my new hosts. We should certainly excuse Daniel 
for being afraid . The multitude of men, women and children , 
perhap s as many as twelve hundred, was hardly reassuri ng. 
The men were armed with a type of spear made of a piece of 
wood to which was attached a sharp stone. These savages are 
large, strong and handsome, and their faces are much more 
similar to European faces than those of the inhabitants of other 
islands in Oceania . The Marquis 6 islanders are, of all the 
Kanacs, those who are most similar to Easter Islander s. Their 
color , even though it is somewhat coppery, is not very differ-
ent from that of Europeans and quite a large number of them 
are completely white . But initially, and especially from a dis-
tance, one does not know what to think because all of them, 
men, women and children, have faces and bodie s that are 
painted in a thousand different ways and tattooing adds to the 
strange impres sion that they make. They use a kind of earth or 
. 
,.. 
ILE DE PAOUES 
_________ _ Arrtvee dtL fr . EYRAUD 
............. ..... Tuite vers ANA KENA 
--·-·-·- ---- -- 2''"" voya9e 
(1866) 
E.CHELLE 
X,lomifr~.s 
"Return to Tahiti!" I re-
plied. "You must be joking .... 
Do you think I came on board 
for the pleasure of a sea voyage . This map is a frontispiece from L'Ile de Paques, L'Il e de Mystere? R. Pere Mouly, des Sacres-
Coeurs (Picpus), Librairie de L'Oeuvre . Brussel s, 1935. 
The captain and the ship's sup-
plier, when they agreed to bring 
me here, knew very well that there was smallpox here. In fact, 
they were the ones who first told me about it". 
So it was decided that I should go ashore alone and that I 
would go by land to Anakena with Pana. The ship would meet 
me there the following day to unload my baggage. I jumped 
into the canoe and, while Daniel was rowing, I asked him to 
take back on board a bit of grass, which I had planned to pick 
on the shore, for my five sheep that remained on the ship and 
were dying of hunger. "Ah !' he said. "Who knows if the captain 
will allow it on board?" "I understand ," I replied , "You think 
that smallpox can be transmitted via grass. Don 't worry." 
Rapa Nui Journal 
50 
the juice of certain plants to decorate themselves in this way -
the women only color themselves with red dyes, while the men 
use all colors indiscriminately. 
Daniel had decided that the islanders were hostile be-
cause he had been unable to recognize a single woman in the 
crowd. But he was wrong and it was clear why. At first sight, 
everyone looked the same because everyone was dressed in the 
same way. This "uniform" was very simple . The main item 
was a band of material made of papyrus or some other plant, 
which they fastened with a cord of hair around their hips. A 
piece of the same material, but larger, was thrown over their 
Vol. 17 (I) May 2003 


--- Page 3 ---
shoulders and tied around their necks by the two ends to com-
plete their outfits. This was the usual dress of both men and 
women and explains why, from a distance, one could not tell 
one from the other. There is, however, some difference. The 
material with which the women cover themselves is usually 
made of some kind of straw but men's coverings are made of 
something else. The men let the ends of their "hip bands" hang 
down but the women tie them up. Thus, there were both men 
and women in the crowd on the shore. And it was actually the 
women that Daniel had noticed predominantly since he had told 
me that the savages had their hair in spikes that stuck out per-
pendicularly from their heads. In fact, it is mainly the women 
who wear their hair in this fashion . 
I had time to notice these details but there was something 
else that struck me forcefully on my arrival on the island. I 
looked for the Kanacs who had come with me from Tahiti . I 
found them in the middle of the throng and they looked almost 
as uncomfortable as I was. The compatriots of Pana and the oth-
ers hardly seemed to be celebrating their return; they seemed 
keener in getting their hands on their belongings. 1 approached 
them and told them that the captain planned to dock at Anakena 
in the morning. They paid no attention to what I was saying. I 
repeated myself several times and Pana finally replied that we 
would leave for Anakena as soon as we had eaten the potatoe s 
that were in the fire. I was hungry, it's true, but I was even 
keener to get away from this noisy reunion. 
Once we had eaten the potatoes , it was time to set off for 
Anakena. But each time Pana and I tried to escape, someone 
would put his hand on my collar. Tired of fighting a futile bat-
tle, and without any hope of getting rid of my vigilant guardi-
ans, I tried to signal the boat that was in the bay. I wave my hat, 
my handkerchief; I shout as loudly as I can but it's a wasted ef-
fort. We try again to escape, slipping behind a rock, but the 
group that we found there let Pana through but took me back 
into the middle of the crowd. 
It was getting dark, and I had no idea what was going to 
happen, when Pana reappeared with some people who were 
armed with spears. I moved as fast as I could towards them. 
They placed themselves between my guardians and me, to cover 
my retreat, and they suggested that I run as fast as I could. I fol-
lowed their advice. It was 11.00 p.m. when my protectors, who 
had managed to join me, and I stopped and went into a cave, 
where women brought us potatoe s. We were now able to take a 
little rest. 
At daybreak, we set off again and reached Anakena. The 
ship was in the bay and came slowly towards us. I tried to signal 
the captain but be seemed not to understand my signals. He 
tacked along the shore and so we had to tack along the shore 
too, with all the natives. We were getting exhausted. Pana 
wanted to go home and I had a problem preventing his depar-
ture, while the ship sailed out of sight. I retraced my steps and, 
accompanied by several Kanacs, I reached Pana ' s home before 
it got dark. 
At this point, I felt deeply depressed, seeing myself aban-
doned on this island, without any resources , and deprived , per-
haps for a very long time, of the ability to speak of our Religion 
to these miserable natives . The ship had left with all my belong-
ings. I could live with that - but what was an irreparable loss for 
me and the cause of my total loss of confidence was finding 
Rapa Nui Journal 
51 
myself deprived of the one thing that could have consoled me 
for the loss of everything else: my Tahitian catechism , which 
was essential for teaching the prayers and the main truths of our 
Religion to the Kanacs. My catechisms and my prayer books 
were still on the ship; the ship had disappeared and was proba-
bly on its way to Tahiti . 
I was dwelling on these sad facts when Pana arrived with 
some of his people . "Your baggage," he told me, "has been 
unloaded at Anarova and has been taken by people who live 
over there. The captain wants you to go and talk to him there 
tomorrow ." 
"Return to Anarova! That's impossible: my feet have blis-
ters and I have twisted my knee. I can't set off again ." 
"We 'll carry you, if necessary , but you absolutely have to 
go to Anarova tomorrow. I will come with you, but not all the 
way because they're furious with me down there." 
Then he invited me to eat sweet potatoes and to come into 
his home for the night. It was the first time that I had been in-
side a Kanae dwelling . And I want to tell you about it - which 
won't take long. First of all, the furnishings are very simple: the 
dishes consist of a calabash for carrying water and a little bag of 
plaited straw for carrying potatoes.7 As for the bed and the fur-
niture, you will understand what they might be when I tell you 
about the house itself. Think of a mussel that is half open that is 
resting on its valve and you will have an idea of the shape of the 
house. A few sticks covered with straw make the framework 
and the roof. An opening like the opening to an oven allows the 
family and their visitors to enter - not on their knees but on 
their stomachs. This entry marks the middle of the building and 
allows enough light in that one can see oneself after one has 
been inside for a few moments . 
You cannot imagine how many Kanacs find shelter under 
this thatched roof. It is quite warm inside and one is exposed to 
the consequences of the poor hygiene of the islanders and the 
lack of cleanliness of their possessions. One cannot go outside 
without carrying , in one's clothes (if one has any) a large num-
ber of the inhabitants of the hut. But, at night, when one has no 
other place to shelter, one has to do what everyone else does. So 
one takes one's place, which is assigned to each one by the very 
nature of the hut. The door, being in the middle, establishes an 
axis which divides the hut into two equal parts . People sleep 
lying head to toe alternately, leaving between them enough 
space for others to come and go. One stretches out, thus, across 
the width of the hut, arranging one's limbs as best one can, and 
one tries to sleep. Even though I was very tired, I had a number 
of reasons for not shutting an eye. Thus, I was able to listen at 
leisure to the songs and the weeping that expressed, so I was 
told, the joy of those present. 
At daybreak, the first object that I saw was a little domes-
tic idol, to which people appeared not to pay much attention. 
Alas! It was not of such gods that I was inclined to think at that 
time. I started, in front of all those present and with all possible 
solemnity, to pray in the language of the Kanacs. I needed, 
more than ever before, to ask God for strength and for patience . 
My troubles were only just beginning . 
I now had to go back to Anarova and deliver myself into 
the hands of those who had already given me so much trouble. 
But I had to keep going so I set off again on foot, in spite of the 
weariness caused by two days of walking along paths that 
Vol. 17 (1) May 2003 


--- Page 4 ---
seemed made to especially to vex European feet. The island's 
terrain is volcanic, with stones and pointed rocks everywhere. In 
the midst of these stones and the grass that grows all over the 
place, there are only the barest outlines of footpaths that are nar-
rower than the sole of a shoe, obliging you to walk with your 
two feet in a single line, without ever being able to put either 
foot flat on the ground. 
When I arrived in Anarova, I was once again surrounded 
by a noisy crowd that covered the beach, as on my previous 
visit. The captain had unloaded my baggage. Several Kanacs, 
armed with spears, seemed to be guarding my property but they 
had also taken the trouble to appropriate anything that they 
could lay their hands on. One of them was proudly wearing my 
hat, another had managed to put on my coat - everything that 
had not been under lock and key had disappeared . But I still had 
several trunks and the sides of a cabin that I had prepared in Ta-
hiti. My most pressing need now was to construct my cabin be-
cause the protectors of my property seemed keen on protecting 
it from its rightful owner also. The four sides of wood attracted 
the most attention. Some of the people acted as if they were 
parts of a boat, others tried to figure out what they were for. I 
told them that if they would leave me alone, I would show eve-
ryone what they were. So then they allowed me to approach my 
things. I took a hammer and some nails and began to set up the 
wooden walls. But I had to keep stopping to listen to a constant 
stream of advice, with some in the crowd suggesting that I stop 
and others that I continue. After proposing many alternatives , 
the spectators finally understood that the object that had in-
trigued them to such an extent was a house. I had not, of course, 
been able to choose the site; I had had to settle for building my 
house around my trunks. But when the job was complete, I had 
the satisfaction of seeing my belongings locked up and the hope 
of being able to sleep in my own home. 
It was growing dark and finally I could breathe more eas-
ily: I had a shelter, my belongings bad not been stolen, and I 
had a key in my pocket. At that moment, Temanu , one of the 
Kanacs, came with a gift of three chickens. As a result, I made 
the acquaintance of a man with whom I was going to become 
far too involved: my evil genius had appeared in the form of 
Torometi .... At the sight of the chickens, he came up to me and 
asked for them, "to take them off my hands and to have them 
cooked". He did indeed take them off my hands and, during my 
nine months on Easter Island, the buffoon continued, with un-
stinting perseverance , to take off my hands everything that I had 
brought with me but which had by no means been a burden to 
me. 
Torometi is a man of about thirty, tall and strong like the 
other natives of the island. His untrustworthy and surly manner 
inspires caution and justifies his bad reputation . I was told that 
he was not a native of the island - but he was indeed a Kanae, 
having brothers and a large family. I noticed that he lorded it 
over his neighbors. It is hard for me to characterize the authority 
of chiefs on the island. I don't even know the basis for such au-
thority. It seems that authority depended only on the influence 
that some natives were able to exert over their neighbors and 
that the people gradually grew accustomed to such displays of 
superiority. In any case, it was clear that Torometi was a chief: 
he was my chief and my neighbor. His home was only a few 
steps from mine but, even so, he did not think that was close 
Rapa Nui Journal 
52 
enough because, at nightfall, he told me to open my door, 
stretched out on my trunks without any ceremony, and invited 
me to go to sleep. He had just taken over my lodgings . 
So now I am definitively established in my new homeland . 
I am accepted, I am recognized all over the island, or at least I 
soon will be. My home is going to become the meeting place for 
all those who are curious about me, that is to say, for all the is-
landers. I am the popa ;8 the stranger that everyone wants to 
know, that everyone wants to watch as he works , and, in par-
ticular, that everyone will make an effort to exploit. You can 
already imagine, most Reverend Father, what my life was like 
on Easter Island. Torometi considered me and my belongings to 
be his personal property . Bearing this in mind, he gave me daily 
my ration of cooked sweet potato - be took care to feed me. 
Thus, I was able to devote my days to teaching the natives . 
That's what I did from my arrival to my departure . I barely had 
more than two things to distract me: the work necessary to culti-
vate a little garden and to sow the vegetable seeds that I had 
brought with me; and the effort required to protect myself from 
the constant interference by Torometi. Apart from this, my stay 
on Easter Island was one long class, a long catechism, inter-
rupted only by brief periods of rest and a few little incidents . 
The bell rang three times a day for prayers. We gathered 
together and I pronounced each word of a prayer and the natives 
repeated it: we really were praying. Next came classes, when 
the natives repeated the prayers and the catechism and I tried to 
teach them to read. In nine months and a few days I did not cre-
ate any scholars but, in the end, some Kanacs, as many boys as 
girls, had learned the main prayers pretty well, as well as the 
principal mysteries of our Religion. Many had started to spell 
out words and five or six could actually read quite well. These 
results might not appear too brilliant but you mustn't forget that 
these poor people hadn't the faintest idea of what I was trying to 
teach them. Moreover , their language lacked the words with 
which to describe it. To teach them the prayers, I had to learn 
their language , which was more difficult than you can imagine. 
With savages, there is no way that you can ask a question or get 
some information. They can tell you the name of the object that 
is in front of them at that moment, but don't go any further -
don't ask for the meaning of a word that you don't understand 
or, in particular , for a definition: that is infinitely beyond any-
thing that they can understand. All that they will do is reply by 
repeating your question. 
To achieve even these minimal results, I had to be, at 
every moment of the day, at the disposal of these children, both 
big and little. Ready or not, Professor and Brother Catechist , 
here come the students. They knock on the door. If I come out 
immediately, that's fine; we start our class on the grass opposite 
my cabin. But if I drag my feet or if, believing that I have no-
ticed that my pupils are keener to play than to learn , I try to 
send them away until later, they don't miss a beat. After having 
knocked at my door, they knock all around my house , then they 
sit down a little way away and amuse themselves by throwing 
stones at the house, fust little ones and then bigger ones to keep 
themselves amused. No matter whether Brother Catechist is in a 
good mood or not, he had better put in an appearance . So out 1 
come, armed with my catechism and, sitting down on the grass, 
I say to them, "Come now, gather round, we shall learn some 
prayers." "No," reply the students, "You come over here!" The 
Vol. 17 (1) May 2003 


--- Page 5 ---
simplest thing is to give in and, with everyone squatting on the 
grass, we repeat the prayers and the questions and answers of 
the catechism, with the pupils paying more or less attention. 
After a little while, some new students arrive. Those who get 
bored first get up and leave; the last to arrive hasten to follow 
them. Soon everyone has left and the teacher starts to do some-
thing else - but he has to be ready to start again whenever the 
students decide to begin their studies once more . If it's not to-
day, it's tomorrow - so be ready because here there is little for 
the people to do and few amusements. They'll be knocking on 
the door soon, saying, "Teach us to pray." 
These good people, in fact, have nothing to do for twelve 
months of the year. One day' s work assures them of an abun-
dant harvest of sweet potatoes that will last an entire year. Dur-
ing the other 364 days; they take walks, they sleep, and they go 
visiting. They also have big gatherings and party continually. 
When a party finishes at one end of the island , another begins at 
the other. The nature of the festivities depends on the season. 
In summer, it is the pa"ina that attracts the entire popula-
tion. Everyone brings enough food to last through the whole 
celebration, especially for the last day, the day of the banquet. 
All the food, placed in a long line and covered with branches , is 
the centerpiece . When everyone has run around for several 
days, when everyone has, according to the rules of etiquette, 
gone through all the necessary motions, the big day arrives. 
They gobble down the potatoes or sweet potatoes . Then they 
gather all the branches that had covered them and make a kind 
of column or mast, which is called the pa"ina. 
Autumn and winter are the rainy seasons and the nature of 
the festivities changes. Pa"ina is followed by areauti. 9 There is 
no more racing around, no more ritual motions or succulent 
banquets of sweet potatoes. They build large houses at the site 
of the festivities and, by houses , I mean huts that are higher than 
usual. Once these are built , the natives gather in groups, form 
two lines, and sing. What do they sing? Oh! I can assure you 
that their poetry is very primitive and, more especially, very 
monotonous. An event that has really sparked their imagination 
is, in general, the subject of the song. Thus, if a disease has been 
introduced , smallpox , for example, they sing about smallpox . At 
one of the parties , they caught my sheep , roasted them and ate 
them - and then they sang about them , I couldn't tell you how 
often. Don 't imagine that they make up poems on these occa-
sions. They just repeat the thing over and over again - some-
times just a single word - and they sing the same thing from the 
beginning to the end of the festivities. 
Spring brings mataveri. They gather on a kind of parade 
ground. The gathering lasts for two months and again they run 
and participate in all possible kinds of exercise. Mataveri is 
linked to pa"ina, which reappears when summer comes . That's 
the way our Kanacs do the best they can to keep themselves 
amused. 
Naturally , these festivities are an excuse for displays of 
extraordinary finery . Everyone appears with his most precious 
possessions. Thus , some of the outfits are quite eccentric . The 
Kanacs are no longer satisfied with the simple state of undress 
of which l spoke above. They put on everything that they can 
lay their hands on. They paint themselves with greater care than 
usual - taking advantage of the services of artists skilled in col-
oration and the tracing of fanciful lines on their faces, which has 
Rapa Nui Journal 
53 
a wondrou s effect. The women put their pendants in their ears. 
These are an extremely curious invention in terms of the art of 
pleasing others. The women begin early in the day to pierce 
their earlobes with a piece of pointed wood; little by little they 
push the point in further and further and the hole gets bigger. 
Then they put in the hole a little role of bark which, acting like a 
spring, expands and makes the hole even bigger. After a while, 
the earlobe becomes a slender loop that falls onto the shoulder 
like a ribbon . On feast days, the women put an enormous role of 
bark into each loop - it looks quite lovely. Moreover , it is the 
fashion and here, as elsewhere , fashion has the last word. 
On these occasions too, the Kanac s wear an amazing vari-
ety of head coverings. It is essential to have a hat of some sort -
sometimes it might be a hat decorated with buttons , or even a 
calabash, half a pumpkin , or a seabird whose carcass has been 
split open and has been cleaned to a greater or lesser extent. 
One day, I saw one of these dear Kanacs had had the wit to put 
one water pail inside another and wore both jauntily on his 
head . Another, having found a pair of boots left by a Peruvian , 
had split them open, joined them togeth er and literally shod his 
head. Long ago I knew a tailor who divided peopl e into two 
classes: people who clothe themselve s and people who dress 
themselves. It is clear that the Easter Islander s belon g to the lat-
ter class. They don ' t care about covering themselv es to keep out 
the heat or the cold; they care about dressing thems elves. Thu s, 
on their important feast days , they dress themselves carefully 
and load themselves up with anything that they can attach to 
themselves in one way or another. A man who has been able to 
lay his hands on a dress wears it; if he has two, he wears them 
both . A woman who has a pair of trousers, a jacket and a coat 
wears them all in the most elegant manner. And happy is the 
one who can add to all this luxury something that makes a noise 
too, such as a piece of metal , etc.! My Torom eti, who under-
stood these things , had taken care, early in my stay, to appropri-
ate a little bell that l had brought with me. The bell earned him 
universal applause and was the subject of much discus sion. 
So that's how they enjoyed themselves . Not everyone 
would agree that their activities were so entertaining - myself 
for one. 
My Kanacs were very surprised that I expressed neither 
admiration nor enthusiasm and they could not understand my 
lack of interest. On many other points , our Jack of accord was, 
unfortunately , even more apparent. I could never get used to the 
smell of the juice of a certain plant with which they rubbed 
themselves and their clothes . And I could never overcome my 
feelings of repugnance on seeing them catch, with the dexterity 
and skill of a chicken, and then eat the numerous parasitic in-
sects that made their homes in the small amounts of material 
with which they covered themselves . 
You would probably like to hear some details of the relig-
ion of our islanders . As far as I could make out during my nine-
month stay, religion seems to occupy a very minor place in their 
lives. My imperfect knowledge of their language , it's true, pre-
vented me from asking many questions on this subject but, in 
spite of the fact that I lived with them in close proximity, I 
never witnessed any act that was really indicative of a religious 
cult. In each of their homes there were many statuettes, of about 
thirty centimeters in height, that represented a man, a fish, or a 
bird, for example. These are, without a doubt, idols, but I never 
Vol. 17 (1) May 2003 
-~---=---


--- Page 6 ---
noticed anyone paying particular attention to them. Sometimes I 
saw a Kanae take one of these statuettes, raise it into the air, 
make a few gestures, to the accompaniment of a type of dance 
and some kind of vague chant. What did these gestures mean to 
them? I don't even think they knew the answer themselves. 
They seemed just to be doing what their fathers had done, with-
out giving it any more thought. If you ask them what it means, 
they answer, as they do about their games, that it is just a cus-
tom on the island. 
I also never saw any religious rites after someone had 
died. When an islander is sick, the treatment consists of taking 
him out of the hut in the daytime and putting him back at night. 
If the patient dies, they wrap him up in a shroud of straw, a little 
longer than his body; they tie up the shroud with a piece of pii-
rau, 10 and they put the whole thing opposite the house, on the 
shore. These bodies, enveloped in their straw shrouds, are 
placed on a pile of stones or on a type of wooden trestle, with 
the head pointing towards the sea. Since the people are spread 
over the entire island, there are dried out bodies all along the 
coastline, and nobody pays much attention to them. 
I don't know what concept these poor savages have about 
death and the life hereafter. One day, after Torometi had stolen 
something, I tried to talk to him about the life hereafter and the 
fact that he would be called to account for his actions. Pana had 
just died. I reminded him of that and told him that he would do 
the same. I bad no idea of the effect that my words would have. 
Immediately after I said, "You will die," Torometi looked as if 
he had been struck by lightning . He started to tremble violently, 
expressing anger and terror. The bystanders did the same. Eve-
ryone was saying, "Our papa says: E pohe o 'e!" 11 It was as if I 
had cast a magic spell. I tried, in vain, to soften the effect of my 
words, repeating that I did not speak their language well, that I 
wished them no harm, but it was useless. Everyone was devas-
tated and I was afraid, for a moment, that I might have to pay 
for my rash statement. This state of affairs lasted for more than 
two weeks. Everyone knew that I had said, "You will die," and 
for a long time I was treated as if I had committed a terrible 
crime. I realized that the words that I had spoken had been taken 
as a threat or as a prediction of a great disaster. Thus, I advise 
all those who go to Easter Island to never say, in front of the 
natives, "E poh e o 'e." 
This incident made me think, moreover, that superstitions 
were not unknown on Easter Island and that Torometi had been 
afraid that I had cast a spell on him. However , nothing hap-
pened to support this possibility and I don't think that such 
ideas are responsible for the things that I am going to report. 
In all the homes there were wooden tablets covered with 
many types of hieroglyphic characters, which are symbols of 
animals that do not exist on the island and which the natives 
incise with a sharp stone. Each symbol has a name but the mini-
mal fuss that the natives make of these tablets leads me to be-
lieve that these symbols, the remains of a primitive writing sys-
tem, represent a custom that they continue to practice without 
trying to recall its meaning. 
[The 2nd portion of the letter begins here] 
The Kanacs don't know how to read or write but they are 
very good at counting, having words for all the numbers. They 
measure time according to a lunar year. But even there they 
Rapa Nui Journal 
54 
seem to have forgotten the details and they disagree about the 
number of lunar cycles. And here's something noteworthy . 
These savages are very interested in everything related to these 
issues. When I spoke of months, the sunrise and other such 
things, everyone would gather round and even the old people 
would take their places among the school children . There was 
the same interest whenever I spoke about written correspon-
dence. One day, while I was holding a class, I saw a ship in the 
distance. Hoping that it might land on the island, I went into my 
hut to write a few lines. My pupils watched attentively from a 
distance . They thought that I could talk to people who were 
very far away and that I was doing so in my hut. They asked my 
about my conversation with the people on the ship. 
Should I speak of the industriousness of these good 
Kanacs? Their needs are so limited that they have little ambi-
tion. It is quite natural for them to be idle and carefree . None-
theless, they are quite skilled. They braid straw adroitly and 
work adeptly with thread, with which they make belts , nets, etc. 
The thread is pulled from the fibrous tissues of the piirau . The 
bark of the maute, 12 beaten and stretched, furnishes the material 
with which they cover their shoulders. Their tools are just their 
fingers and any stone that they pick up. They don't know how 
to use European tools. If they have to trim their beards, they 
take a sharp stone. They would use a stone to cut thread even if 
there was a pair of scissors at hand. Above all, they love to sew. 
One can give them great pleasure by giving them a gift of a few 
piece of fabric with which to patch their cloaks, which soon be-
gin to look like a harlequin costume. 
Agriculture, as I have noted already, requires no great ef-
fort. The soil is fertile, if stony, and the regular rains and tem-
perate climate seem to render this little island suitable for all 
kinds of plant. My attempts were relatively minimal. The few 
vegetable seeds that I sowed did yield a crop. All the plants that 
I brought with me seemed to become acclimatized but some of 
them were stolen by Torometi, who let them dry out before he 
tried to plant them. The tiny plot that I tried to cultivate disap-
peared little by little, destroyed by my neighbors and the chil-
dren. Nonetheless , my efforts did demonstrate that it should be 
possible to grow all crops found at the middle latitudes . The 
Kanacs don't need so many things. And agriculture, like every-
thing else, is still at the embryonic stage. When it is time to 
plant sweet potatoes, they use a pointed stick to make little 
holes in the ground, they put in the potato eyes, and that 's it. if 
they are planting a vine, they push a little pile of dirt around a 
seedling and rely for further assistance on Providence . It never 
occurs to them to till the dirt or to water their plants. 
Thus, nature leaves little for these fortunate islanders to 
do. However, they still have to cook. But here too there is little 
that is complex. It does not take much to cook the eternal sweet 
potatoes . That's what they eat every day, the invariable every-
day meal of the Kanacs, both young and old. There are indeed a 
few chickens and, very occasionally, someone catches a fish but 
these tasty delicacies are shared only by a few privileged peo-
ple. The wife and children, when the husband has eaten, might 
perhaps suck on some bones, which have already been sucked 
free of flesh once and even twice. Apart from these exceptions, 
there is perfect uniformity: always sweet potatoes , everywhere 
sweet potatoes, cooked in the Polynesian manner here, as on all 
the islands, by steaming in a hole in the ground , with heated 
Vol. 17 (1) May 2003 


--- Page 7 ---
stones. However, the Kanacs do this very skillfully and could 
certainly teach us something. 
I have noticed that the Kanacs are very careful not to spill 
blood. They strangle chickens. One day, I was using my knife to 
kill a chicken and a woman who saw me almost passed out. To 
kill dogs and goats, they dig a hole of the desired size and bury 
the animal's head. When the animal has suffocated , they take 
out the animal, singe its skin, and then, without further ado, they 
put the body into the regular oven with the sweet potatoes . I be-
]jeve that the sight of human blood is similarly repugnant to the 
Kanacs. Even though they have had knives since the arrival of 
the Peruvians , they never use them in their feuds. If they want 
to send someone into the next world, they find it simpler to use 
stones. Thus, when Torometi was displeased with his meal, he 
literally stoned his wife so brutally that the poor creature was 
unable to move the next day. 
All that is left to tell you now, Most Reverend Father, is 
about the purely personal adventures that I had. And I have de-
cided to tell you about them to give you a more exact idea of the 
morals of the island. These little incidents are not very varied 
because, at bottom, they all involve my efforts to prevent my-
self from being robbed of everything or, at least, of everything 
all at once. Torometi , of course , wanted to steal everything as 
soon as possible and, while I tried to drag out the entire process , 
my host took advantage of every occasion to make a renewed 
assault on my property . Torometi had a very bad reputation , 
which seemed well justified to me. Nonetheless , I have the im-
pression that, had I fallen into other hands, I would not have 
been better treated. All the Kanacs accuse each other of theft. .. 
and all the accusations are true. If there are some who steal less 
than others, it's only because they lack the chance or the nerve. 
Immediately after I landed, Torometi , who considered 
himself the owner of everything that I had brought with me, 
started to appropriate everything that I had not locked away. 
The next day, I had to open all my trunks in front of him, show 
him everything that they contained , and explain the purpose of 
every object. Unfortunately , he was not satisfied with just look-
ing at things. He saw a )jttle axe and immediately took it. That 
was the subject of our first argument; I resisted as much as I 
could but I was unable to take it from him. There was only this 
single axe on the entire island and he was very keen to acquire 
it. "And anyway," he said, ''I'll lend it to you when you need 
it." So I had to resign myself to the loss of my axe. Torometi 
was never without this weapon and he used it to induce me to 
give him everything that he coveted during the course of my 
stay. During his first inspection of my belongings , another thing 
that intrigued him was my bell. I had an enormous amount of 
trouble keeping it and placing it above my cabin. The gifts of 
nature, with which my guardian absconded , grew up one more 
time during my stay on the island. 
You might find it strange that I was so accommodating . 
Indeed, I did offer a little resistance but, in the end, I felt that it 
was prudent not to let things go too far. The natives don't often 
resort to violence . I have seen them have noisy arguments and 
bum down each other's huts but without, nevertheless , corning 
to blows. I am no less convinced that, if Torometi had gotten 
really irritated, he would have had a way of taking care of me. 
Moreover, Torometi was not alone - I was dealing with the en-
tire population of the island and, when I was feeling better and I 
Rapa Nui Journal 
55 
made a greater effort, I achieved no better results. If I closed my 
door to this unwelcome scrounger , he would go and sit some 
fifty paces from my hut, and soon his wife, his neighbors and 
the anyone in the neighborhood would sit down with him and 
they would begin to make a terrible row. They would throw 
stones and make me see quite clearly that it would be better for 
me to surrender the object that Torometi coveted than to let 
them demolish my home or to wait until they set it on fire. 
Meanwhile, I needed a chapel. I worked on this project 
during the few free moments that I had when I was not teaching 
prayers or catechism . There was not much to choose from in 
terms of construction materials; all I had at my disposal was 
earth mixed with straw and dried in the sun. It was summertime . 
I had to be satisfied with seawater for moistening the earth and 
with dried grass instead of straw . In spite of everything, I would 
have been able to build something passable had I not been inter-
rupted by the winter rains and if I had had more scrupulous 
neighbors. In vain, I cut grass and left it to dry: Torometi had 
discovered that there was nothing better for his kitchen fire and 
I had to start over every day. 
In three months, all that I managed to achieve was the be-
ginnings of a chapel, eight meters long and four meters wide, 
with walls that were barely 130 centimeters high. The rains pre-
vented me from continuing and Torometi, whom I had asked to 
help me, told me quite clearly that he did not want a mud house. 
So I abandoned my work as a mason and concentrated on teach-
ing the catechism exclusively . 
Soon I took upon myself the task of visiting the entire is-
land. My intention was to visit the principal sites and to teach 
the natives at each site in succession. When I told Torometi of 
my plans , he seemed against them initially but then appeared to 
approve of my departure . Once I had reached Temana , I started 
to teach the catechism and to congratulate myself on the good 
mood of my hosts. But, then, one fine day, I was told that Toro-
meti had taken advantage of my absence to move everything out 
of my house. I set off again for Anakena , accompanied by a 
group of Kanacs. 
When he saw me, Torometi appeared most surprised. He 
said that he would have been unable to cause me the slightest 
harm. According to his account , it was the wind that had blown 
open my shutters and had caused the disappearance of a large 
number of items from my hut. 
The results of my first excursion made me delay a second 
one for a while. Moreover , it was wintertime and, even though 
the winter weather is relatively mild, it is still felt by people 
who wear as little as our Kanacs . The rain does not last very 
long but it does rain frequently and sometimes the wind is 
strong enough to whip up a high sea that prevents anyone from 
landing on the shore for a week or two at a time. At such a time, 
my Kanacs had a new idea. They got the idea into their heads 
that I should build a boat. There was no point my protesting that 
I knew nothing about such things - my protestations went un-
heeded . They thought that I knew everything and could do eve-
rything , even build a boat without wood and tools. I was in a 
pretty tricky situation . I have already told you how they carried 
on when they were determined to get something from me. So 
they began to make another ruckus . "You want wood," they 
shouted , "We have lots of wood." And they ran all over the is-
land, gathering all the bits of planks, all the pieces of wood -
Vol. 17 (1) May 2003 
- -
--
- ----
-
~-
-- -
-
----~ 
-


--- Page 8 ---
straight, bent or rotten - that they could find. This boat was go-
ing to be the result of national cooperation. On other occasions, 
I had noted this custom of making everyone contribute to a pro-
ject that was considered important. Nobody would think of not 
participating . There is no need for me to add that I also had to 
sacrifice some of the wood that I had. Then , with so many fine 
contributions , it would have been rude of me to refuse, any 
longer , to get to work as carpenter and boat builder. I ceased to 
resist and, at the end of two weeks, my impatient Kanacs were 
able to see something that resembled a boat. Ah! These two 
weeks had seemed such a long time to them and they had 
barely allowed me the time to eat. 
The assemblage of all these pieces of wood left something 
to be desired and, in addition, it was also necessary to make the 
craft watertight. I announced that this final task was their busi-
ness and, since they indicated that they had a type of clay that 
would make a good seal, they set to work. I was only afraid of 
one thing and that was being chosen to take command of this 
new and dangerous vessel. That same day, and before the seal 
had time to dry, they wanted to launch it. So I shut myself in 
my hut. 
But they were determined to complete the festivities ap-
propriately . Recalling that the vessels that had sometimes sailed 
to the island had been manned by sailors in shirts and trousers , 
they dreamed up the idea of getting all dressed up too. Of 
course , I had to provide their costumes . One of them, Teoni , 
had the nerve to go into my hut and steal my trousers. Pushed 
to the limit, I seized the thief by the arm and threw him out of 
the door. I had not noticed that he was carrying an axe and I 
was wounded in the arm. The copious flow of blood horrified 
the Kanacs, and Teoni gave up his quest for trousers . I went 
back into my hut and watched the launching of the boat. 
Dragged brutally across the stones, it reached the water ' s edge 
in no time. Now what would happen? Everyone wanted to par-
ticipate and to contribute to the long-anticipated launching . 
But, alas, their joy was short-lived . As the boat entered the wa-
ter, so water entered the boat - and soon it was full. It was im-
possible to proceed further. Farewell , boat rides and expedi-
tions. Gone were the dreams of our good native islanders. They 
would have to find other ways to amuse themselves and, in-
deed, they did not lack for entertainment. 
Mataveri was approaching and everyone was a little ex-
cited. Torometi's behavior was even more outrageous than be-
fore. He asked me for all the rest of my belongings, "to hide 
them because someone is planning to steal them ." Since these 
fine fellows are so suspicious of one ·another , and with good 
reason, they are always on the alert to defend and to hide the 
little that they have . And hiding places abound. There are deep 
caves , some natural and some artificial, all over the island, and 
they have very narrow entrances . Only a few stones are needed 
to cover and hide each entrance. At any given moment, the en-
tire population of the island could disappear, hiding in these 
caves . Torometi proposed to put my belongings in one such 
cave to keep them safe. I refused outright. But Torometi, his 
brother and his wife, with neighbors as reinforcements, set 
upon me and I was unable to resist. They took my keys, gath-
ered up all my possessions, leaving me only my mattress and 
the boxes for my tools. Once the operation was complete , they 
returned my keys. 
Rapa Nui Journal 
56 
Nothing like this had happened to me before. Without a 
doubt , Torometi had often arranged things so that he could ex-
tort some coveted object from me. He had begged me and 
threatened me but he had never actually resorted to violence . 
The last barrier had fallen and it seemed that henceforth I 
would have to fear for my life. The only thing to do was to ex-
tract myself from the grip of this tyrant by running away. But, 
until now, I had never managed to get away without him stop-
ping me or going through my luggage and I had had to beg him 
repeatedly for permission to go and baptize Pana and three or 
four others who had begged for this benediction. Thus , I waited 
for a favorable moment to escape the vigilance of my Cer-
berus - and soon such a moment arrived. 
Some Kanacs from Anapika 13 came to carry my few be-
longings and I set off with them, in spite of Torometi's arrival 
just as we were leaving . The people of Anapika were well dis-
posed towards papa because, of course, they planned to rob 
him in their turn . I had hardly had a moment's rest in Anapika 
when Torometi showed up with some islanders : they had come 
looking for me. I did not want to go with them and there was 
another long struggle. In the end, they knocked me down , 
grabbed me by the arms and legs, and set off again. They had 
the patience to carry me in this way for about two kilometers 
but they were not very gentle and I felt almost tom in two. I 
told them that I wanted to spare them the trouble of carrying 
me further and they set me on the ground. They returned my 
shoes and I finished the journey with them on foot. 
A surprise awaited me. Torometi had put back into my hut 
most of the things that he had taken from me a few days earlier. 
"You thought that I was a thief but here is what was miss-
ing. I simply wanted to put everything in a safe place. The real 
thieves are the people that you went to see. You will soon un-
derstand that because you can give up any hope of seeing what 
you took with you again: everything is gone . Go back now to 
those people who don't even have a single sweet potato for you 
to eat." 
I was quite confused , as much by the failure of my 
scheme as by the mistake that I had made. I understood that 
Torometi had been right when he told me that I would never 
again see the things that I had taken with me and that the other 
Kanacs were not any better than he was. A week later , I went 
looking for my trunks. Alas, Torometi's words had been true to 
the letter : I was able to bring back nothing except damaged and 
empty trunks. 
More was about to happen . It was September 
and 
mataveri brought together a large part of the population about 
six or eight kilometers from our home territory. Torometi was 
clearly focused on this reunion and expected that it would bring 
about the coup that he had been expecting for some time. One 
of the Kanacs , Tamateka , had, in fact, let me know that Toro-
meti was hated by everyone and that his misdeeds would bring 
him an exemplary punishment. 
One morning , I saw Tamateka arrive , followed by a 
crowd of people who gathered in front of Torometi's hut. Eve-
ryone was talking at once, the discussion became heated and, 
even though I never understand any of these arguments , it was 
easy to see that things were going to end badly . I came out of 
my hut and sat down a little distance away . Torometi , on his 
side, had come out of his hut but was barely participating in the 
Vol. 17 (1) May 2003 


--- Page 9 ---
discussion . I really wanted to get away from all the fuss but I 
was keen not to lose sight of my hut and I wanted to keep an 
eye on the crowd too. Soon things began to get quite threaten-
ing. A few brave souls approached Torometi's hut, tore at the 
straw that covered it, and tried to tip it over. Immediately, it 
burst into flames . It was windy and the fire was over in severa l 
minutes. Torometi had remained impassive, sitting beside the 
fire. One of his friends had to take him by the hand to pull him 
away from the fire, which was about to reach him. I was afraid 
that my hut might suffer the same fate but , I am happy to say, 
there was no attempt to attack it. In fact, a few Kanacs , armed 
with spears , set themselves up as guards all around it. 
When there was nothing left of Torometi 's house, the 
crowd, seeing the famous boat that I had built tried , in vain, to 
destroy it too. At that moment, Torometi, surrounded by a few 
partisans, tried to distance himself from the scene of his misfor-
tunes. Now, instead of being just a spectator, I found myself 
involved . Torometi wanted me to go with him but his enemies 
had the opposite idea . However, recalling the futility of my pre-
vious attempts to separate myself from Torometi, I decided to 
follow him. 
We set off in the direction of the mataveri festivities . A 
dense and excited crowd came with us and the discussions con-
tinued . I was in the center of the throng , hemmed in on all sides 
and deafened by so much noise . My turn had come. Suddenly, I 
felt my hat being taken and, at the same time , several pairs of 
hands removed my overcoat , my waistcoat and my shoes, 
which were soon in tatters . I found myself dressed pretty much 
like my neighbors . When I was able to glance around, I saw the 
thieves wearing their spoils: one was wearing my hat, others 
the remains of my overcoat and those who had taken my cate-
chism and prayer books were looking for ways to include these 
in their outfits . Our progress was not interrupted by these 
events; I set off again like the others. We arrived at another hut 
that was to be set on fire but there was no general agreement 
and little by little the crowd dispersed. I thought I was at the 
end of my peregrinations and, in spite of all the emotions that I 
had experienced, I consoled myself with the thought of spend-
ing the night there. But Torometi wanted to return to my hut -
he wanted to recover some of the things that had been left 
there. 
So we had to set off again. It was dark and I scratched my 
feet with every step. It was certainly the worst part of the entire 
day. When we arrived at my hut , I did not have the key since it 
had been taken with my clothes . I went in via the roof and 
passed to Torometi the things that he wanted. For myself , I was 
happy to put on an old pair of shoes and, draped Roman style in 
an old coverlet , I set off again with Torom eti on the path to 
Anapika , where his brother lived . We spent the rest of the night 
there . The next day my companion, who was still worried, 
thought of moving still furth er away and led me to Vahui , 
twelve kilometers further on. Subsequent events prov ed him 
right. We learned that his broth er's hou se, where we had stayed 
in Anapika , had been burned down . 
In Vahui, I found sweeter and more docile people , who 
were keener to learn than those everywhere else. I set to work 
teaching the catechism with fresh enthusiasm. Barely a week 
had passed when the children in the class shouted that there 
was a black dot on the horizon, "A ship!" It really was a ship 
Rapa Nui Journal 
57 
and it was aiming for the island . I watched it for a little while 
but, seeing it head south, I figured that it must be going to do 
the same as the other four or five ships that I had glimpsed over 
the past nine month s. Night fell and the ship was no longer visi-
ble. I went to bed without giving it any further thought. 
The next day, at about eight o'clock in the morning , a 
child came and told me that there was a ship at Anarov a and 
that Torometi was asking for me . I set off without breakfa st and 
met Torometi as he was corning to meet me. The ship was tack-
ing towards the shore . Seeing the French flag , I reassured the 
Kanacs who were afraid that the ship might be manned by pi-
rates. We follow ed the ship 's movements along the shore and 
saw a small boat being let down into the water. Torometi , with-
out waiting any longer, took me on his sho ulders and carried 
me to the boat, where I fell into the arms of Father Barnab e. A 
moment later, we were aboard the Teresa Ramos . 
Father Barnabe will tell you the details of his voyage to 
Easter Island . As for me, when the decision is made defini-
tively to establish a mission on the island, I might be able to 
give some useful advice to those to whom this task is assigned . 
In the meantime, please be assured, Very Reverend Fa-
ther, of my deepest respect and my total devotion to the Order 
of the Sacred Heart s. 
- Brother Eugene Eyraud 
FOOTNOTES 
1 71 Blake Rd., Hamden CT 06517 .aalt man @snet.net 
2 Information Technology Services, Yale : judith.schwartz@yale .edu 
3 Brother Eugene's letter was originally published in Anna/es de la 
Propagation de la Foi (Annals of the Propagation of the Faith), 
38:52-71, 124-138 , 1866. 
4 Father Olivier's letter was published in the same volume, 38:45-5 2. 
5 An archipelago 1,600 km southeast of Tahiti, the largest island of 
which is Mangareva . 
6 Marquesas Islanders. 
7 The reference is to sweet potatoes. 
8 Popa 'ii is Tahitian for a stranger of a white race. There is some ques-
tion whether Eyraud wrote "papa" or "papa ". Apparently it could 
be either way, depending upon an interpretation of his handwrit-
ing. While "papa" might be used to describe the father of his 
flock, "papa " would make sense in the context of being a white 
stranger. 
9 According to Steven Roger Fischer (personal communication 2003), 
the word "areauti" was mentioned also by the other missionaries, 
and has puzzled scholars ever since. It appears to relate to a pre-
contact feast, and was renamed once either Eyraud or the other 
m1ss10naries, 
lay 
brother 
and 
catechists 
arrived, 
to 
"areauti". This appears to be an incorrect transcription (because 
of French phonology) of what was originally "hare ha 'uti" or 
"play/lovemaking house", which doubtless refers to the activities 
which took place in the building. While "hare" is Rapanui for 
"house", the "ha 'uti" is Tahitian, for "play/lovemaking ", and 
would have been a borrowing of the 1860s, one of the first re-
corded borrowings in the Rapanui language. What the original 
name of the feast was is still unknown. 
10 Rope made from the bark of Hibiscus tiliaceus; Ptirau is the Tahi-
tian term for Hibiscus, used here by Eyraud. The Rapanui word is 
hauhau. 
11 E pohe o 'e is Tahitian for "dying of hunger". Again, the "papa" in 
this sentence might be "papa ". 
12 Mahute or barkcloth . 
IJ This probably is Hanga Piko. 
Vol. 17 (1) May 2003 
-
--
~ 
----· 

