--- Page 1 ---
34 
Eastep Island OP Rapa Nut 
CONGREGATION 
OF THE SACRED HEARTS OF PICPUS, 
MISSIO 
ARY ON EASTER ISLAND FROM 1866 TO 1873 
' 
' 
EXTRACT FROM THE ANNALS 
OF THE SACRED HEART 
(FEBRUARY-APRIL-JUNE 
1926), 
OFFICE OF ANNALS 
OF THE SACRED HEART, 
BRAINE-LE-COMTE 
(BELGIUM) AND 35 RUE DE PICPUS 
PARIS XIITH, 
1926 
Woman of Easter lshn d. Drawing by Radiguct, from Dupctit-Thouars, 1841. From S. 
Chauvet 1934, Figure 11. 


--- Page 2 ---
. 
Hippolyte Roussel 
36 
Easter Island or Rapa Nui 
Reverend Father Hippolyte Roussel 
of the Sacred Hearts of Picpus, to whom we owe most of the credit for con-
verting the natives of Rapa N ui to Christianity between 18 66 and 18 7 3, 
left some notes about this strange land in the Pacific that deseroe 
to be pub-
lished. These notes, made in 1869, are a precious contribution to historic 
studies and thry are the fruits of his obseroations and research into the de-
tails of the lives of the natives which were characterized, alas, not on!J ry the 
savage brutality of man's worst instincts but also ry the unique and incoher-
ent nature of their customs. 
Father Alazard, 55-CC 
THE PEOPLE, THE RULING DYNASTY 
AND THE PRESTIGE OF ROYALTY 
The people who live on Rapa Nui are gener -
ally small but they can be distinguished from 
other Pacific islanders by their pale complex-
ions, the regularity of their features, and the 
sweet and kind expressions on their 
faces. There are, however, some exceptions 
to this rule. Members of the older genera-
tion, who are much more robust than the 
younger islanders, think that they might be 
adding something of value to their demeanor 
by rolling their eyes and covering themselves 
with those indispensable tattoos. The end 
result tends to obscure the kind and concilia-
tory features with which nature has endowed 
them. 
Photo of Roussel 
taken in Pape'ete 
August 28, 1873. 
(Archivos SS-CC, 
Rome) 
The present generation has preserved the original features of the 
islanders to a greater extent because its members, growing deca-
dent, have failed to maintain the line of tattoo artists. By con-
trast, the present-day islanders attempt, using all the means at 
their disposal, to beautify themselves artificially with different 
37 


--- Page 3 ---
Hippolyte Roussel 
colors that they moisten in their hands with saliva. 
When I set foot on Rapa Nui and saw its small but noisy popu -
lation, all painted the color of blood with harpoons or rusty sa-
bers in their hands I would have been afraid, just as other travel-
ers have been if I had not been prepared for all eventualities 
and if I had not been forewarned by one of the natives who 
had taken it upon himself to be my guardian from the moment 
I arrived. I was surrounded by a crowd that pressed up against 
me from all sides and it seemed prudent to follow his advice 
and climb up onto a large chiseled stone that was on the 
shore. I was safe there and from there I blessed the land and 
began to speak to my audience who, without exception, 
wanted nothing more than to take from me every last thing 
that I possessed. 
Their toilette, as is the case everywhere, required a certain 
amount of effort because the mud that they plastered on them-
selves dried in the sun's rays and as a result of the warmth of 
their bodies and had to be reapplied daily or even several times a 
day. We fought against the savage customs for a long time with-
out success but now Christianity has put an end to them and 
one can make them blush by reminding them that they used to 
slather themselves with red mud . They will add, sweetly, that 
they only did it to frighten foreigners since they do not want to 
admit that it had been an example of poor taste. 
I shall leave it to the experts to discuss the cradle of Rapa Nui 
culture. It is clear, however, that the Rapanui belong to the Poly-
nesian family, as indicated by their traditions, their customs, 
their tapus, their religion and their language, which are almost 
indistinguishable from those of the people of the Gambier Ar-
chipelago. The common traditions have resulted in the fact that 
Easter Island has never had a name in Maori that distinguishes 
it, in particular, from other islands in the Pacific. The name 
"Rapa Nui" is unknown to the natives . This designation of their 
homeland was introduced by foreigners or, more likely, by the 
38 
Easter Island or Rapa Nui 
natives of neighboring islands that would have landed here on 
whaling ships. No matter whom I asked and how many times, 
asking over and over again to confirm the truth of their asser-
tions, they always answered, "We don't know the name Rapa 
Nui - our land has never had its own name - we only know 
Hanga Roa, Vaihu, Otuiti, etc., etc .... " Everything except the is-
land has its own name and that extends as far as a particular hut, 
cliff or rock face and includes every little piece of land or paved 
area - that is where names such as Mateveri, Hanga-pika and 
Hapina come from. 
According to the natives, the island was deserted when two 
great ships, without masts, with the prow raised like a duck's 
neck and the poop raised similarly but split into two halves, 
sailed along the Southwest coast until they came to a bay, in the 
North, called Anakena. Each of these boats held about one hun-
dred people. This poor small bay with its beach of white sand 
seemed a good place to land according to Hotu, the captain of 
this small fleet, and his wife, A vareipua. He ordered the two 
boats to be pulled up onto the beach and then men, women and 
children disembarked with all their belongings, which included 
pigs, 1 chickens, taro, sweet potato, a tropical vine igname (yams), 
bananas, toromiro2, gaoho3, maute,4 sugar cane, etc. There are two 
little plants on the island that could not have been imported, 
namely, marikuru and naunau.5 They barely grow at all on the is-
land except in cracks in the rocks. I asked the islanders, to test 
them, if these bushes had also been brought by the original set-
tlers. "No", they all answered, with one voice, "they are local 
plants, from Rapa Nui. You see the goats and the pump-
kins? Well, they were also not brought by our ancestors. They 
were gifts from the ships that came from Callao" .6 
After a short rest at Anakena, the new colonizers spread out 
over the island and settled, some on one promontory and some 
on another . Then, immediately, they set to work cultivating the 
plants from across the water. Hotu, who was the king and who 
settled at Anakena, wasted no time before abdicating in favor of 
39 


--- Page 4 ---
Hippolyte Roussel 
his son Taumeeke. The king used to abdicate when his son got 
married but this event did not occur for a long time since the 
customs of the country did not allow the son to get married un-
til he had reached quite an advanced age. 
Taumeeke was succeeded by Vaka:i, who was succeeded by 
Marama, who was succeeded, in turn, by Raa, Mitiake, Otuiti, 
Tunkura, Miru, Ataraga, Tuu, Ihu, Haumoana, Tupaariki, Mata-
i:vi, Terahai, Kaimokohi, Gahara, Tepito, and his son Gregorio, 
the last offspring of the royal family, who was an intelligent 
child and died when he was about twelve years old, mourned as 
much by the missionaries as 
by his subjects . The entire 
line spanned twenty-two 
generations.7 
From Hotu to the last king, 
who had been taken away 
with two of his sons and his 
two daughters on Peruvian 
ships, there had been an un-
interrupted succession of 
great chiefs or kings. These 
kings, who were regarded as 
gods, exercised absolute 
power over the island and 
used their authority to retain 
the prestige associated with 
the gift of apparently super-
A kava kava figure 
human powers, as well as cer-
(S. Chauvet, 1934: Figures 126 and 127). 
tain personal privileges. To 
the kings alone belonged the first fruits of the land. These offer-
ings were brought to them with great ceremony. I was there 
when the natives brought the first vines [yams] of the year to 
Gregorio at his home. A procession was headed by people car-
rying the vines, followed by numerous natives and boys in two 
lines, each holding a peeled branch of hau (T rz"umfetta 
semitnloba, 
40 
Easter Island or Rapa Nui 
used for making rope) that had been painted black. The proces-
sion resembled nothing more than a funeral procession with 
flaming torches. From time to time, the air resounded with 
howling and incomprehensible singing. 
Only the kings had the right to begin the harvest, which re-
mained taboo until they wanted to begin. Woe unto anyone who 
dared to violate the taboo . Often, such an act would cost him 
the destruction of his property and sometimes, even, the loss of 
his life. 
The king's head was taboo. The 
king had to let his hair grow, 
without ever touching it with a 
stone blade. I recall quite clearly 
how, when I arrived on Easter 
Island, Gregorio was presented to 
me as the one and only true chief 
and how he was the only one to 
have long hair. When, for reasons 
of hygiene, I asked one of the 
Mangarevans who had accompa-
nied me to cut his hair, the child 
put up considerable resistance 
and gave in only as a result of 
force or fear. The general feeling 
of discontent was so apparent 
that it would not have taken 
much for them to start hurling 
An engraving of Reverend Father 
Gaspard Zumbohm SS-CC. He 
spent time on Easter Island with 
Father Hippol yte Roussel. Zum -
bohm died in 1887. 
stones at the barber once his work was complete. 
The kings' hands were also taboo - they were allowed only, un-
der the guise of recreation, to make fishing lines and nets. They 
were allowed to fish from a canoe but their homes, their lands, 
their food and their entire persons and everything that they used 
were taboo for people of both sexes. 
41 


--- Page 5 ---
Hippolyte Roussel 
I did not see any evidence of classes on Rapa Nui other than the 
kings (arikz), the priests (ivi atua), the warriors (matatoa) and the 
farmers (kio). In recent times, even though the kings were still 
viewed with respect by the common people, who considered 
them to be something sacred, their authority was, nonetheless, 
either absent or totally unrecognized: it had passed completely 
into the hands of the matatoa, who decided everything and 
fought among themselves without prior consultations with His 
Majesty. There was absolutely no thought of just cause in their 
declarations of war. Personal vengeance, jealousy, covetousness 
and hunger were the usual motives. In these conflicts, the king 
or chief had nothing to fear in terms of insult from either party; 
they could stay at home without anyone even thinking of both-
ering them . Nonetheless, either from fear or out of prudence, 
some of them temporarily abandoned their domestic hearth to 
remove themselves from the theater of war: from there they 
might leave to spend some time in Hanga Roa, Anakena or 
Atuiti. 8 
WAR 
Once war had been declared, all those who were going to take 
part smeared themselves with black dirt and spent the night 
without sleeping. They busied themselves with preparing their 
weapons and hiding their valuables. There were certainly no hu-
man sacrifices or other offerings in honor of the divinity to en-
sure his protection. It seems that the idea of a religious cult dis-
appeared with the last priests and priestesses, who died a long 
time ago. 
Before daybreak, the warriors set off on foot, accompanied by 
their wives and children, who followed behind them, singing 
protective chants and wailing. The women and children settled 
themselves on the high ground closest to the battlefield so that 
they could watch the victory or the defeat of their husbands or 
their fathers . 
42 
Easter Island or Rapa Nui 
Obsidian spear points 
(S. Chauvet 1934: Figures 79 - 82). 
After a day of vengeance, the defeated islanders were kept, un-
der guard, in caves and they were only allowed out to work - all 
were now slaves and all had to plant a certain piece of land for 
their respective masters. When these little masters no longer 
needed their services, they sent them back to their homes under 
some pretext or other but, in reality, so that there would be 
fewer mouths to feed and, especially, to force them to plant all 
their own crops once again. If the slave, sent back to his home, 
43 


--- Page 6 ---
Hippolyte Roussel 
forgot the lesson that he had been taught so often and was fool-
ish enough to replant, on his own land, enough for his family, 
he could expect to see himself robbed again at the first possible 
chance, when all resistance would again be futile and would be 
met with a return to slavery or another war. So what did the de-
feated islanders do? They contented themselves with just plant-
ing one twentieth of what they would have needed to live in 
relative ease, preferring to die of hunger than to plant for some-
one else. 
The consequences of such continuous privations were tragic for 
the population and provided fertile ground for an incurable dis-
ease,9 which will eventually, if it continues, destroy Rapa Nui. 
So that is how things stood when the missionary arrived. 10 
Thanks to the Religion, exercising his influence over the natives, 
he was able to put an end to these raiding parties. Everyone was 
content and happy; nobody wanted to see a return to the past 
except, perhaps, one person and this single individual, alone 
among the islanders (the hidden enemy and the chief of the is-
landers! The one who boasted of having killed two islanders!), 
this proud and brainless man T orometi, who would have be-
lieved it! actually tried to reestablish the old habits among a 
population of Christians and to make himself the Chief of the 
Robbers. We would like to believe that the few settlers who find 
themselves here, far from giving him their confidence, should 
see that it is in their best interests to stop him. 
Initially, the natives used the following weapons: the hau,11 a 
type of long club; a short heavy club; and a piece of a dried 
gourd attached to the end of a long hau branch. Later on, a man 
called Eta, returning from his field of sweet potatoes, banged his 
foot hard against a mata12 (a piece of very sharp stone). He hurt 
himself so badly that he conceived of the "wonderful" idea of 
replacing the piece of calabash by a mata. He used this new lance 
to great advantage and all the warriors followed his example. 
The natives also used axes, harpoons, and any other sharp 
44 
Easter Island or Rapa Nui 
The origina l caption reads, "Some objects from Easter Island that are the 
property of the Musewn of the Mother House of the Sacred Hearts . 1, A 
staff for sacrifices (eaao) [correctly, ao]; 2 and 23, scepters {;ta); 3, 4 and 5, oars 
(rapa); 6, 10, 11, 19, and 24, carved wooden balls (!ahonga); 
7 and 8, ornaments 
(reimiro), made out of planks from a ship; 9, head of a statuette (moaz); 12, 13, 
14 (16, 17, 18 and 25, wooden statuettes (moaz); and 22, long staff, used by 
the king to call for rain. The natives used all these objects during their cele-
brations. Some served as decoration, others helped to make them look im-
portant or to sing or gesticulate in rhythm: the natives made the wooden moai 
jwnp around in their hands like marionettes." There is no description for 
nwnbers 15 (a moko), 20 or 21 (both are tahonga). 
implement that they had been able to obtain by barter from 
passing ships. As a last resort, they would even throw stones. 
45 


--- Page 7 ---
Hippolyte Roussel 
POPULATION 
Nothing is known for certain about the size of the early popula-
tion of Rapa Nui. The intelligence of the natives and their 
memories are insufficient to allow any estimate of such num -
bers. Nonetheless, they all agree that long ago, before smallpox 
and before they had been taken away on Peruvian ships, there 
were very many of them and that the number of women and 
girls exceeded the number of men and boys, while quite the op-
posite is true today. And one should not be in too much of 
a hurry to accuse them of lies and exaggeration in the latter case 
because I notice regularly that of any three deaths, two are al-
ways of females, which might explain the disproportionate num-
ber of males. 
I have trouble believing that the population was as high as five 
or six thousand, as some of the natives insist. The interior of the 
island has never been settled 13 as can be recognized from the 
absence of paved areas and of any signs of maute and toromiro, 
which provide clear evidence of ancient habitation. Only the 
shore was inhabited and the clusters of maute, toromiro and hau 
that are scattered about suggest a population of no more than 
five thousand souls with an average of five or six people per hut. 
According to the recent censuses, the population would have 
been reduced to 650 people . 
What was the cause of this great diminution in numbers, I can-
not think of any apart from, as I noted above, their general state 
of privation, the dampness of their huts, the unhealthy winter 
air, their immorality and the gross imprudence of cohabiting 
with those who are sick. To threaten them with certain death in 
the latter case is a wasted effort. They do not cling to life and 
they are not afraid of death, without having any real desire for 
their own deaths. As long as they remain hopeful of saving a 
sick person they continue to provide a certain level of care. If 
the illness gets worse, they abandon the invalid and pay no fur-
ther attention to his requests and his wants . 
46 
Easter Island or Rapa Nui 
In fact, scrofulas 14 are the only illnesses on Rapa Nui but they 
seem to me to be very different from those in Europe. There are 
also a few cases of dysentery but they are so rare that there is no 
need to worry about it. I have seen two cases of tetanus, which 
were lethai and one case of apoplexy and one of congestion of 
the brain. The case of the apoplexy involved a young man who 
was found dead on the shore. The case of congestion of the 
brain involved a man of about twenty who died after three days. 
That is what I have witnessed during my three years on Rapa 
Nui. 15 I know of only one idiot (a little boy) and I have only met 
one blind man. Madmen, that is to say, people who are really 
crazy, are unknown on the island . I say "really crazy" because in 
the olden days a certain number of individuals would act as if 
they were madmen or were possessed - perhaps they really were 
or perhaps they were just pretending in order to steal food ·more 
easily from other people. 
GOVERNMENT 
It would be a contradiction in terms to call the perpetual thiev-
ery a form of government. I will not repeat what has been said 
before, that the Great Chief stayed out of the affairs of the is-
landers and that luck alone, the discovery of a few eggs of a sea-
bird, was all that was needed to transfer the chiefs authority to 
the happy nest-robbers who then took the name of matatoa 
(warrior). In any case, the investiture of chiefly authority only 
began when the candidate's head had been shaved . The Chiefs 
role was limited to marauding day and night and to spending his 
year in power tricking as many people as possible and having 
continuous parties of the most immature and licentious kind. 
CUSTOMS 
One custom that has been handed down to the present day is 
that any tuna fish caught by a fisherman should be given to the 
chief or, if not to him, to the matatoa. Another custom is that 
47 


--- Page 8 ---
Hippolyte Roussel 
plantations, held in common by the members of a single family 
or located on the same piece of land and defined only by a few 
stones placed at regular intervals, should be cultivated synchro-
nously and then the first fruits should be taken to the Chief. 
When the crop is perfectly ripe, no matter what it is, the planta-
tion in which it is growing becomes the focus of festivities for 
the village and, sometimes, for several villages, depending on the 
size of the plantation and the importance of the person who is 
considered to be its owner. 
For these festivities, the natives gather as much food as they 
can, with chickens making the greatest contribution. That is 
when the matatoa, leaving their caves on the Mataveri mountain 
(Rano Kau), would fight like vultures for everything that took 
their fancy, without anyone else daring to ask too loudly for his 
share. The same thing would happen when someone died or 
upon the birth of a child, but with more or less ceremony de-
pending on whether the newborn was a boy or a girl. A boy is 
considered far more precious than a girl - girls count for almost 
nothing . It is rare that such festivities take place without prob-
lems because the matatoa themselves, being jealous of one an-
other, start trying to rob each other after they have robbed all 
the guests. 
It was the Rapanui custom for the hero of the festivities to re-
main to one side and not to touch any of the food that was to 
be eaten. Fortunately for him, when night came and everyone 
. had disappeared, he could bring out of hiding everything that he 
had taken care to put aside. Once the festivities have finished, 
the leftovers are eaten by the kio (domestic servants) and the 
plantation can once again, by right, serve the needs of the family 
that owns it. 
The sea adjacent to a piece of land belonged to the owner of the 
land. Only he, if he wished to, had the right to fish there, to look 
for octopus and edible mollusks. To claim this right, all he had 
to do was make his rahui, 16 which consisted of three stones, one 
48 
Easter Island or Rapa Nui 
on top of the other, aligned along the stretch of land beside the 
sea that he wished to reserve for himself. 
The customs of the island had defined the work of the men and 
that of the women. Young girls lived a life of shameful leisure 
until they were married. The exclusive occupation of the men, 
both old and young, was the planting and tending of their plan-
tations until the crops reached full maturity; to fish (in the case 
of men of property), to make fishing nets, and to build huts. 
The young men rented themselves out, with an average salary of 
one or two rats and a few sweet potatoes . 
Women making tapa cloth (mahute). The family 
shown is said to be "a Rapanui family on the 
Cook Islands" . Roussel 1926. 
Beyond that, every-
thing was women's 
work. Each woman 
had to make sure she 
had sweet potatoes 
and the wood and 
grasses needed to 
cook them. And woe 
unto her if she failed 
in her housekeeping 
efforts. Her negligence 
would often cost her 
dearly. It was her job 
to beat the maute 
(papyrus) 17 and to 
make garments from 
it. These garments 
made of maute are the 
most beautiful that I 
have ever seen; they look like our blankets made of cotton pique 
and are very useful in the winter season. 
There is no taboo preventing a man and his wife from eating to-
gether with children of both sexes but the husband, as the 
strongest member of the family, always gets the best food. Only 
49 


--- Page 9 ---
Hippolyte Roussel 
a husband who is very attached to his wife and children will al-
low them an equal portion or, when fish or chicken is served, 
even allows them his leftovers. There are some husbands who 
eat separately from the rest of the family. 
OWNERSHIP OF PROPERTY 
There is no doubt that the concept of ownership of property 
was accepted on Rapa Nui: the boundary markers and the ahu 
that are scattered all over the place are a testament to this fact. 
Most recently, however, this concept has become less estab-
lished and the first person to occupy a piece of land claims it for 
himself. Each family used to remain simply the master of land 
that heredity or an enforced or voluntary stay had put into their 
hands. Nobody paid too much attention, given the vast areas of 
land that were not cultivated and the absence of anyone who 
wanted to buy any of the land. Tlie bad behavior of the natives 
and their displacement, an obvious consequence of their con-
tinuous wars, have left questions of ownership of property in an 
almost inextricable tangle.18 Also, to buy a piece of property it is 
necessary, I should not say always since there are some excep-
tions, to accept the fact that one must buy it from all the indi-
viduals who live on it if one does not want to take the risk of 
swindling a large number of people. Then, add to this problem 
that of orphaned children, of which there are great numbers, 
and you will get an idea of what proprietorship is like on Rapa 
Nui. 
MORALS 
Cannibalism was practiced for a very long time and only disap-
peared entirely with the introduction of Catholicism. Under the 
sweet and charming exterior that I mentioned above, the natives 
hid their deceitful, violent and sometimes ferocious characters. I 
cannot count the times that I have seen a man attacking the face 
or the head of his wife with a knife to kill her or mortally injure 
her. And who knows how many foreigners have been eaten? 
50 
Easter Island or Rapa Nui 
I've heard about such incidents at Anakena, in the crater and at 
Hanga Pika and the natives keep silent about others.19 
When Brother Eugene was robbed and was hit with a stone and 
almost killed, the women were the first to laugh about it and to 
make fun of him. We should not think however that someone 
was trying to kill him. They were extremely skilled at sinking 
rowboats so that they could capture and eat the rowers. Barely 
more tha~ a year ago, when a whaling ship was passing Hanga 
Roa, a sailor asked for news of two of his friends whose boat 
had been scuttled and who had escaped onto the island. 
Nobody knew anything about them .. .? What could have hap-
pened to them ... ? 
In everyday arguments, stoning was very much the fashion . 
Throwing stones in someone's face was considered to be part of 
a1:1 ar~ent 
to make one's opponent stop talking or to make 
him ~ve up . Suicide was very common and was achieved by 
throwmg oneself over a precipice into the sea. This morbid cus-
tom was so deeply rooted that, in spite of their conversion to 
Catholicism, a small slight was enough to push some people to-
wards this great misfortune. 
The natives were hospitable to their repahoa (friends), whether or 
not ~ey came from the same bay. They were also hospitable to 
foreigners but always with the goal of getting more than they 
gave. If someone did not respond to a gift by giving a gift of 
greater value, the host would make good the deficit by stealing. 
The truth was and still is of little importance to the natives, even 
when the most serious issues are at stake. Resembling sheep 
they will all go wherever the first of them has gone . They s~dy 
the looks and gestures of the most esteemed among them or of 
the person who, they think, has the greatest influence . If his 
looks or gestures correspond to a negative or a positive pro-
nouncement, you can be sure that everyone else will be in full 
agreement, no matter what the truth might be. 
51 


--- Page 10 ---
Hippolyte Roussel 
It would be madness to look for true affection in the heart of an 
Easter Islander . They rejoice as much at the death of someone 
close to them as at his birth. Their expressions of pain are the 
equivalent of making faces: self-interest alone is their guide and 
the basis for ·their actions. 
They have a few songs that are accompanied by some rhythmic 
movements, and they are both very monotonous and very vul-
gar. They claim to have had a kind of written language, which 
allowed them to hand down the important facts about their 
country to posterity. I have seen this writing carved on a rather 
long piece of polished wood and it resembles, to a great extent, 
the hieroglyphics of the ancient Egyptians . In my opinion, I do 
not think that the natives were able to make much sense out of 
these characters. When asked to read them, the few natives who 
claimed to understand these symbols were reduced to telling ri-
diculous and unintelligible tales. 20 
MARRIAGE 
Couples entered into marriage without consulting their parents. 
Their predilection for each other was the only factor. Dissolu-
tion of a marriage was a matter of minor importance. The slight-
est argument or the end of their mutual attraction was enough 
to break the ties that bound them. The wedding ceremony con -
sisted of setting up a fat conical bundle of hau branches . Then 
the bundle was surrounded with more than enough food to sat-
isfy the guests . The couple presided over and participated in the 
meal and, when all the food had been eaten, their married status 
was recognized . Marriage between relatives was abhorred but, 
not only were bigamy and polygamy considered acceptable, both 
were also held in high regard. Adopted children were included in 
the ranks of legitimate children; they received the same care and 
the same treatment, with the exception of a certain preference 
for the latter. 
52 
Easter Island or Rapa Nui 
RELIGION 
The Rapanui have a fair number of gods; the most powerful 
ones, those who are the source of all the others, are Hiva, Make-
make and Tive. The worship of these gods ceased with the dis-
appearance of the priests and priestesses . All that remained were 
certain taboos, to which nobody seemed to pay much attention . 
The natives believed in the immortality of the soul. The soul, 
after death, went to a foreign land where it was happy or un-
happy depending on whether its owner had been more or less 
faithful during his lifetime in the observance of taboos. If the 
soul was happy, it would be nicely dressed and remain forever in 
its new country. If, by contrast, it was unhapp y and poorl y 
dressed, it would return to its family on the island to torment 
them. 
What were their ideas about souls and spirits? It is unclear. Ac-
cording to the natives, a soul or a spirit was something rather 
vague, a kind of specter without a head and having only ribs. 
They seemed to be very afraid of these ghostly souls; they came 
3 #r@i~~©tlP~~Ifl~t~ ~~&~@ 
it~~~!~@i~ijfOO~~~'rl\~lcli. i 
1 JJ ~,~~ii~~~mf~~§~~ir 
Sketch of a rongorongo tablet in the collection of Mon signor Jaus sen SS-CC . 
on many occasions to ask me to chase away, as they said, the 
bad spirits of a father or a mother, who was tormenting them 
and tearing at their entrails . 
THE WRITING OF EASTER ISLAND 
The Figure shows a sketch of part of a tablet in the collection of 
53 


--- Page 11 ---
Hippolyte Roussel 
Monsignor Jaus sen SS-CC. The lines of writing are read boustro-
phedon, that is to say in a manner that resembles the way oxen 
plow a field, going from left to right and right to left, without 
interruption, like the furrows in a field. 
PRIESTS 
There used to be both priests and priestesses here . Their func-
tions were rather limited . The y presided over the celebrations 
for a newborn and they chased away the evil spirits from the 
bodies of the sick. It was also their job to compose and sing 
songs in honor of the dead. 
I have no idea whether they ever participated in human sacri-
fices. I have only heard the natives speak of offerings on the 
ahu, offerings _of chickens , fish, etc .... 
The ahu, or sacred place, was where the natives placed their 
dead; its taboo was not inviolable as it is everywhere else. 21 
STATUES 
Everyone who has visited Easter Island has been struck by a 
certain astonishment on seeing the statues there . It is true that 
they are grotesque, but they are also gigantic and are distributed 
in large numbers around Rapa Nui . Visitors have wondered 
A sketch of Ahu Vinapu. (from William J. Thom son , Report of the National 
Museum, 1889, page 512). 
54 
Easter Island or Rapa Nui 
where they might have come from . And how did the natives 
manage to set them up and to transport them over such great 
distances. 
These statues are made of soft stone and are about seven meters 
high and three meters in diameter. The y were all carved out of 
the exterior face of the Otuiti Crater, at the northern tip of the 
Sketche s showin g side and back views of a moai at Rano Raraku (from Wil-
liam J. Thom son, Report of the National Museum, 1889, page 493). 
island.22 Some have remained in the quarry without having been 
detached from the rock, as if they had been abandoned before 
they could be completed . The y were carved with a hard stone 
that was narrower at one end than at the other and was about 
fifty centimeters long. 23 
It is not known how these statues were transported and 
erected - only a legend remains . The Great Chief of the time, 
who was all-powerful like his predecessors, ordered the statues 
to walk and then all of them, on hearin g his words, started move 
and chose destinations around the island that appealed to them . 
55 


--- Page 12 ---
Hippolyte Roussel 
It is likely that, on festive occasions, all the clans gathered to-
gether, each one bringing its household gods, 24 and dragged the 
statues with ropes made of hau to their respective locations. 
I am led to believe that the stone statues were dragged and not 
rolled because one never finds a statue that has been broken or 
Photo of a pukao at Puna Pau 1914 (From Routledge, 1919 Figure 80). 
abandoned during transit: all arrived safely at their destinations 
and have smooth backs. 25 It is also noteworthy that, the further 
the statues are from the crater, the smaller they are, and that the 
biggest ones that are standing today are those that remain at the 
Otuiti Crater. 
Tradition has it that the enormous millstone that rested on each 
head was put on top of each statue by piling up stones. These 
hat-like objects, which rest cone-like on the heads of the statues, 
are about three and one half meters in diameter and they are 
made of a red stone that comes from a quarry at the other end 
of the island, at Puna Pau . The smallest ones were taken away 
and the largest ones remain high up on the mountain. 
56 
Easter Island or Rapa Nui 
Rano Kau crater (from William J. Thomson, Report of the National Museum, 
1889, Plate A'VII). 
CRATERS 
Rapa Nui is made of many craters, the three largest of which 
contain fresh water, namely Rano Kau (at Mataveri), Rano Aroi 
(in the center of the island) and Rano Raraku (at Otuiti) in the 
extreme north. None of the fresh water in the volcanoes is of 
any value - only reeds grow there . The volcano at Mataveri is, 
however, lined with hau and toromiro, which grow on its inside 
slopes. 
AGRICULTURE 
The natives grow sweet potatoes, bananas, yams, sugar cane and 
taro, but all in such small quantities that, for four months of the 
year, they are dying of hunger . But, also, one should add that it 
is not only their laziness but also the poor quality of the land 
that prevents a good harvest . 
The winds here are almost continuous and all the attempts at 
farming made up to this point by foreigners and ourselves have 
been fruitless. Trees lose in winter what they have gained in the 
summertime. The acacias, for example, grow shoots one year 
and then the old shoots dry out the year after to make way for 
new ones. Peach trees flower but none of the flowers leads to 
57 


--- Page 13 ---
Hippolyte Roussel 
fruit because of the violence of the wind . The most progress has 
been made in raising animals but one must not forget that there 
is only water inside the craters and that the few pigs that were 
brought here ahno st all perished . How will sheep fare? Time will 
tell but one has already died of an intestinal aihnent. 26 
Father Hippo!Jte Roussel, SS-CC 
Missionary on Easter Island (1869) N. B. 
Easter Island is today annexed to Chile. It is no longer under the 
jurisdiction of the Apostolic Vicar of Tahiti..27 Since 1892, the 
island has been entrusted to the pastoral care of the Archbishop 
of Santi.ago, Chile. The last missionary of the Sacred Hearts of 
Picpus to visit this mysterious island was Reverend Father Isi-
dore Butaye, of the Apostolic Vicariat of Tahiti. He spent eight 
days there , from January 27 to February 4, 1900. The population 
had reached 231 inhabitant s of whom 213 were natives . 
Father Ildefonse Alaza rd SS-CC 
Endnotes [The author's original notes are in bold] 
1 There is no evidence that pigs arrived with the settlers. If they started out 
with them, these animals did not survive the sea voyage. 
2 Toromiro: sophora tree, now extinct on the island . 
3 Ngaoho: a bush, caesalpinia bonduc. used as a medicine; the fibers were used 
for rop e. 
4 Mahute-. the broussanetia 
papirifera tree; it' s bark was used to make clothin g. 
5 Naunau, sandalwood, was, according to tradition , on the island at one time 
but no traces of it have been found . 
6 La Perou se left the goats; Callao is a port in Peru . 
7 A comp arative list of king's names is given by Metraux (1940 :91 ). Thi s list 
comp ares the Roussel, Jaus sen, Thom son and Metraux' sequence of 
name s. Twelve of the 23 name s on Roussel's list are includ ed in Th om-
son's list; Rou ssel and Jaussen have nin e name s in common. Few are 
given in the same order . 
8 He may be referrin g to the land s of Hotu-iti. 
9 Tubercul osis 
10 While Father Roussel arrived on Easter Island in 1866, let us not for-
get that he was preceded by Brother Eugene Eyraud, who landed 
58 
Easter Island or Rapa Nui 
there for the first time on January 2, 1864, and returned later on 
March 23, 1866, together with Father Roussel after a visit to Val-
paraiso. 
:: Ua o~ paoa are name s of club s; hau was used to make rope. 
- Mata a 1s a spear pomt made from ob sidian. 
13 Roussel is in error; the interior was settled, but sparsely. 
14 Tuberculo sis of the lymphatic gland s. 
15 The Reverend Father Roussel arrived on Easter Island on March 23 
1866. Thus, it was in 1869 that he prepared this manuscript which' 
was sent to Valparaiso, where it remained until 1914. We owe our 
access to this manuscript to the kindness of Reverend Father Felix 
Jaffuel, the Provincial of South America. 
16 To declare a rahui on a thing or a place was to make it tabu forbidden. 
17 Mahute is not made from reeds; it is from the broussanetia papirifera tree. 
18 Also, land that belonged to tho se who were kidn app ed by slavers and 
taken to Peru was up for grabs and ownership was disputed by the survi-
vors. 
19 There are no documented instance s of any foreign ers being eaten. 
20 The wise men who were able to read and write rongorongo had dis-
appeared by the time the missionaries arrived, having been carried 
off by slave traders. A single one of their pupils, Metoro, made it 
back to Tahiti, where Monsignor Jaussen heard directly from him 
the meaning of the hieroglyphics and songs that were written on 
the few ta~lets that were saved from destruction. Monsignor Jaus-
sen has wntten a paper on this extremely interesting question. It 
was published after his death under the title, Easter Island. His -
tory, Writing and the Repertoire of Signs on the Tablets or Intelli-
gent Hibiscus 
Woo~ 32 pages, Le Roux, Paris, 1893. 
21 Mrs. Scoresby Routledge published, in 1919, a splendid volume, The 
Mystery o! the Easter Islan~ which is really, we have to say, the 
last word m terms of the ethnography of this mysterious island. 
Among the numerous engravings that illustrate the text, there are 
many ahu with reconstructions of displays of the dead. All the cu-
riosities of Rapa Nui are, moreover, broadly represented as well as 
the various sites on this little island . There are two engr:vings that 
w~ fo_und particularly moving: one shows the village of Hanga Roa 
with its chapel, and the other shows a group of natives in front of 
the very door of the church. Alas, they have no priest to instruct 
the~ and to administer the sacraments. It was only very rarely that 
the island received a visit from an almoner of the Chilean Navy 
and he did not speak their language. 
22 The quarry, Rano Raraku, is at the east end of the island, close to the south 
coast. 
23 Tokz; the basalt pick s tha t were used to carve the statues were usually 
59 


--- Page 14 ---
• 
Hippolyte Roussel 
around 30 cm in length. 
24 We should not interpret the phrase "household gods" to mean that 
these statuettes were actual idols. To date, nobody has been able 
to prove that they were ever the focus of a religious cult and thus 
remain full of mystery for ethnographers. In addition to the giant 
stone statues, the Rapanui also had wooden statuettes, carved in 
greater detail. The ribs and backbones were exaggerated and faces 
carved in a grimace. These were shown off at festive gatherings, 
together with other curiosities sculpted by their artists. 
25 We suspect that the reason these two words are in italics is that they were 
inadvertentl y transposed. The text would make more sense if the author 
said that he believed that the statues were rolled rather than dragged , if 
"rolled" were interpreted as "moved on roller s". 
26 The sheep did, eventually, become acclimated and made up the major 
product of the country by 1926. 
27 An Aposto lic Vicar is a special delegate sent from Rome, in lieu of a 
Bishop. 
References 
Chauvet, Stephen, 1934. L'i/e de Paques et ses Mysteres. Edition s "Tel", Paris. 
Thomson, W. J. 1891. Te Pita Te Hentta, or Easter Island Report of the United 
States National Museum for the year ending June 30, 1889. Annu al Re-
ports of the Smithsonian In stitution for 1889. Washington. pp. 447-552. 
Routledge, Katherine. 1919. The Mystery of Easter Island. Hazell, Watson and 
Viney, London . 
60 
DlaPJZ 
of a Gaclat; 
OR f;ha WaPshlp ha F/ope 
A sketch by Pierre Lori of the statues on the side of Rano Raraku. 
From S. Chauvet, 1934, Figure 53. 

