--- PAGE 1 ---
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY |

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL
LIBRARY

Gaur No. 401.0997 ——_ Mel= Bul |

D.G.A. 79.

--- PAGE 2 ---
LAKSHMi 890K STORE
42-M. Al. Je
New Delhi.

Phone: 40668

--- PAGE 3 ---

--- PAGE 4 ---

--- PAGE 5 ---

--- PAGE 6 ---
EASTER ISLAND

--- PAGE 7 ---

--- PAGE 8 ---
ALFRED METRAUX

Easter Island

A STONE-AGE CIVILIZATION OF
THE PACIFIC

oo
Translated from the French by
MICHAEL BULLOCK

90] 0997
Met] Bul

ANDRE DEUTSCH

--- PAGE 9 ---
FIEST PUBLISHED 19$7 BY
ANDRE DEUTSCH LIMITED
{2-14 CARLISLE STREET SOHO SQUARE
LONDON WI
© ANDRE DEUTSCH LIMITED 1957
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
WESTERN PRINTING SERVICES LTD
BRISTOL

CENTRAL ARCHAEO! O SIGAL
LIBRARY, “W vu. Ab

ee
Ace. -
13/1%/5.%
Dai 901-0947] Meh REE.

--- PAGE 10 ---
CONTENTS
Foreword
Introduction
I Easter Island and the Lost Continent
II Easter Island—Polynesian Soil
Ill The Tragic Story of Easter Island
IV How the Easter Islanders Live
V A Cannibal Society
VI From Birth to the Tomb
VII Religion and Magic
VIII Ancestor Images
IX The Great Statues
X Feasts
XI Poetry, Music and Dancing
XII The Mystery of the Tablets
XII Easter Island Myths and Legends
XIV The Origins of Easter Island Civilization
Bibliography
Index

Page 9g

--- PAGE 11 ---

--- PAGE 12 ---
ILLUSTRATIONS

The following pictures are to be found between
pages 124-125

View of the Rano-raraku volcano

An Easter Island native selling curios
Beating tapa cloth

Viriamo, who was born about 1845

Juan Tepano, our informant, carving a wooden image
A girl on her way to church

Playing cat’s cradle

Victoria Rapahango, descendant of kings
Petroglyphs of the bird-man

A petroglyph of a shark

A tupa, probably a shelter for fishermen
Stone houses at Orongo

Ancestor image, back view

The head of an ancestor image

Portion of the tablet Aruku-kurenga

Two views of a female ancestor image
Stone statues on the slopes of Rano-raraku

Recumbent statue in the quarry where it was
sculpted

--- PAGE 13 ---
ILLUSTRATIONS
Unfinished statue

Head of fallen statue, crowning the Ahu Tonga-riki

Stone ‘hat’, lying near statue on which it
once stood

Seaward facade of Ahu Tepen
Fallen statues on an ahw of the south coast

Seaward facade of Ahu Vinapu, built of dressed
slabs

Another view of the facade of Ahu Vinapu
Statues on the slopes of Rano-raraku
Statue on the slopes of Rano-raraku

--- PAGE 14 ---
ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT

Easter Island canoe with outrigger Page 70

. Images made of bulrushes covered with tapa cloth
painted to show patterns of body painting and
tattooing 77

Types of obsidian spear-heads (mataa) ror

. Similar symbols in the Indus script: (a) on the
Easter Island tablets; (b) in the most ancient

forms of Chinese writing 202
. Sequences of identical signs in Row 1 of tablet
Aruku-kurenga 203

. Easter Island aku compared with religious stone
structures from eastern Polynesia 235

--- PAGE 15 ---
c , ' al
< ¥ —onn >t i = Dir)
“=e ARRAS ae, ns)

PND lat aah nate a
LET ee * y ah
75 Je yiR


--- PAGE 16 ---
FOREWORD

Ever stnce the day it was discovered by the Dutch, Easter Island,
that tiny patch of land standing solitary amidst the ‘immense
wastes’ of the South Pacific Ocean, has been surrounded by a halo
of mystery and strangeness. The ideas about Easter Island that have
gained currency, even in educated circles, deserve a place in the
annals of folklore. It is held to be the last vestige of a
continent, once the seat of a brilliant civilization. Reference is even
made to ‘triumphal ways’, which are said to run across the island
and lose themselves in the sea. The inhabitants found there by
s were looked upon as ‘savages’ or ‘de; tes’, inca
a ikaw erected Epes La in the midst of which rs.
eked out a miserable existence. It has often been claimed that a li
exists between the island and the ancient civilizations of Central
and South America, and its statues are said to hold the secret
of migrations that took place thousands of years ago, In the
United States, Easter Island has been associated by one writer with
# certain continent of Mu, whose vanished glories he has des-

Works of a more scientific character speak of a megalithic civil-
ization said to have spread to Easter Island from Asia, impressive
relics of which are distributed at intervals across Indonesia and
Micronesia. The gigantic tilith of Tonga, a distant replica of the
Cornish dolmens, is identified as one of the mute testimonies to the
passage of this people of builders over the Polynesian islands. To
these men, enamoured of the colossal, Easter Island was no more
than a stepping-stone: it is claimed that they also landed on the

ican continent, where the monolithic Tiahuanaco Gate and
the palaces of Cuzco are held to be their handiwork.

sc interpretations of the Easter Island monuments imply a
kind of mystic faith in a golden age of humanity and betray the
desire to ascribe to the distant past an aureole of grandeur and
mystery; but they show little for the precise data of archac-
ology and ethnography. Since the statues and other ruins on the
island belong not to the domain of mythology, but to that of reality,
the problems they raise demand to be studied on the spot and
according to the methods of science. In point of fact, the work of

9

--- PAGE 17 ---
To FOREWORD

the British expedition led by Mrs C. Routledge in 1914 served to
dissipate more than one legend and more than one error.

Despite the important results obtained by Mrs Routledge, one
enigma remains, infinitely more disturbing than the weight or the
height of the giant statues with their disdainful scowl. A few years
after the catastrophe that wiped out the island’s civilization, mis-
sionarics found a number of wooden tablets covered with odd signs.
At first sight these rows of complicated symbols looked like a
system of hieroglyphics. Now, no Polynesian island appeared to
have possessed a script. If, alone in Polynesia, the inhabitants of this
Ultima Thule knew the art of writing, and if they alone had been
able to carve and erect great statues, they had a right to proclaim
themselves the survivors of a glorious past and the scions of a privi-
leged race. Perhaps the visions of grandeur and splendour attached
to their island were not all fantasies of over-imaginative minds.

This hypothesis of an Easter Island whose civilization was linked
with that of the ancient les of Asia seemed to be confirmed a
few years ago, when a erica: Guillaume de Hévesy, pointed
out some remarkable parallels between the symbols engraved on the
Easter Island tablets and elements of the script just then discovered
in the Indus Valley and undoubtedly going back some 3,000 years
before the Christian cra. These analogies a ed to cast an
entirely new light on the origin of Oceanian culture and the migra-
tions that contributed to its diffusion.

The theory made great strides. It was not merely India that was
joined ross dha by a common script, but also prehistoric China.

ir Heine-Geldern drew attention to the apparently very close
resemblance baron certain archaic Chinese characters of the
Shang epoch and the Easter Island ‘glyphs’. These comparisons,
together with other factors of a ra seemed to indicate a
common centre, situated in Asia, from which various cultural
clements—if not whole peoples—had detached themselves and
swarmed towards the Pacific. These reconstructions of hypothetical
migrations extended to pre-Columbian America, which was also
brought within the orbit of the ancient Asiatic civilization.

The audacious solutions to the problems of Easter Island that
have been proposed give some idea of the importance the latter has
assumed in the history of civilization. It was in the hope of bringing


--- PAGE 18 ---
FOREWORD Ir

to light fresh facts which might solve this two-centuries-old riddle
that a scientific mission was organized on the initiative of Dr Paul
Rivet, Director of the Musée de l"’Homme, Paris, and with the sup-
port of the French and Belgian Governments. Supervision of
archaeological research was entrusted to M. Charles Watelin and
Dr Henry Lavachery. I was in charge of the ethnographic and
linguistic enquiries.

M. Watelin nursed hopes I did not share. Indifferent to the
modern Easter Islanders and the traditions that might still survive
in the island, he expected to see the walls of ancient cities—similar
to Mohenjo-daro—emerge beneath his pick. He was certain that
the trenches he was going to open at the foot of the volcanoes would
lay bare an unknown civilization. For my part, I must confess, I
was attracted by these few hundred Polynesians who have survived
so many disasters and continue to speak their ancient language and
hand down the legends and stories of their distant ancestors. I was
not unaware of their state of decadence, their ignorance of the old
religion and past customs, but I hoped, in spite of everything, that
in the rare techniques which might have survived and in the tradi-
tions still known to a few old people I should perhaps be able to
catch a faint murmur from the did times which would give me fresh
insight into the ‘mysteries’ of this island.

¢ French Navy assisted the expedition by providing the mem-
bers of the mission with passage on board the colonial despatch
vessel ‘Rigault-de-Genouilly’, which had only recently left the naval
dockyards and was going out on its first cruise.

Our voyage took five months and was made in several stages. It
began with the departure from Lorient on a rainy day, to the sound
of fanfares and bells and an accompaniment of salvoes. A priest
blessed our cruise from the top of a belfry standing on the tip of a
promontory. We received a farewell according to the old traditions
of the Royal French Navy still honoured in this Breton port. Not
unnaturally, I recalled M. de La Pérouse who, like nel 3 once
set sail for Easter Island on a warship whose pennants flapped as
they were caught by the wind of the open sea.

First we visited the West African ports, then those of South
America. In four months we sailed from Gabun to the glaciers of
Tierra del Fuego. There we lost Charles Watelin. In spite of his

--- PAGE 19 ---
12 FOREWORD

advanced age, he had preserved an alert and youthful mind that
had made of our voyage a glorious adventure. He wanted to see
everything and know everything. He contracted pneumonia during
a hunting-party in Patagonia and passed away in sight of the
Chilean coast, after we had crossed the Gulf of Pefias.

My colleague, Dr Henry Lavachery, ae Chief Conservator
of the Brussels Royal Museums of Art and History, joined us at
Lima. From that moment forward our work became a joint enter-
prise, pursued in a spirit of comradeship that remains for me the
most pleasant memory of this expedition.

We reached Easter Island on July 27, 1934, and we left it on
January 2, 1935, aboard the Belgian Gaining dp ‘Mercator’, which
took us to Pitcairn, Tahiti, the Tuamotus, the Marquesas and the
Hawaiian Islands,

The aim of this book is to give a picture of the old Easter Island
culture based on the material gathered by our iS soar It would
have been impossible to reconstruct this past without the compara-
tive elements furnished by the ethnology and ar the
neighbouring archipelagos, which are inhabited by peoples of the
same language and the same race.

In calling to life this civilization which had been dead for almost
a century I had only its wreckage to help me. In the interpretation
of this collection of disconnected and second-rate evidences 1 was
assisted by two eminent specialists on Polynesia—Dr Peter Buck
(Te Rangi Hiroa) and Dr Kenneth - During my stay at the
Bishop Muscum, Honolulu, both these cthnologists were devoting
themselves to the resurrection of the civilization of Mangareva (the
Gambier Islands), whose traditions and history are much better
known to us than those of Easter Island.

‘The names of two natives who were among our principal inform-
ants, Juan Tepano and Victoria Rapahango, will occur frequentl
in the course of this book. Tepano knew the civilization of his
fathers only through a few childhood memorics and old men’s
stories. Victoria Ra: go, a woman of about thirty-six, intro-
duced us into the closed gossipy little world which is the modern

Toa.

i of Hanga-roa.
ih bok'S ax nie bdahee p eats eee
pologists. Detailed information of interest to them is given in a

--- PAGE 20 ---
FOREWORD 3

voluminous monogra lished in 1940 by the Bernice P. Bishop
Museum under the tide Ethnology of Tacs Island. The conclu-
sions are presented here without the scientific paraphernalia that
might repel the reader who is not a specialist in Polynesian ethno-
logy. Several chapters of this English edition have been revised
in the light of studies of Easter Island published during the last
ten years. There have not been as many of these as one might
have wished, and they have not produced many new facts or inter-
ego The litcrature of the island’s ethnography has, however,
enriched by one valuable work—the Rev. Father Sebastian
Englert’s La Tierra de Hotu-Matu‘a.* Englert spent more than
twelve years as a missionary on Easter Island, where he settled in
1936, a year after our expedition. His excellent knowledge of the
r langua which he has given us a dictionary and a
grammar—cnabled him to become acquainted with details of
native folklore and the ancient culture ot the island that had
escaped his predecessors; but they do not alter, in an significant
ie facts already established. 1 fear that it has ear become
almost impossible to obtain any fresh information concerning the
island’s past. This is growing dim in the memories of the new
generations, who reinterpret it in their own way. The voyage of
the ‘Kon-Tiki’ and Thor Heyerdahl’s theories on the peopling of
the Pacific islands have given the problem of Easter Island fresh
rs eee It would have been difficult to ignore them in this
ition. That is why, in response to my publisher's request, 1 have
added a few pages in which I have tried to summarize the views of
this intrepid seafarer and my objections to them. I have also felt it
Necessary to present, in the af on the Easter script, the opinions
of Professor R. von Hcine-Geldern and the more recent views of
Professor J. Imbelloni. Although I do not share the conclusions of
these two scholars, I did not wish to diminish the of the
lem by neglecting the important studies they fave Gove to
it. In the chapter I have likewise noted recently published
monographs in the field of Polynesian research having a direct
1A, Métraux, Ethnology of Easter Island, Bernice P. Bishop Museum,
Bulletin 160, Honolulu, 1940.
® La Tierra de Hotu-matu'a. Historia, Etnologia.y Lengua de la Isla de Pascua,
ed. ‘San Franciso’, Padre Las Casas, 1943.

--- PAGE 21 ---
14 FOREWORD

bearing on the interpretation of the origin and development of
Easter Island civilization.

If I had resigned myself to regarding the problems of Easter
Island as insoluble, I should have been justly accused of following
the line of least resistance. The solutions of numerous ‘mysteries’
put forward here may displease those who prefer the attraction of
enigmas to the rational explanations that can be offered. But it must
also be frankly admitted A ae certain riddles of Easter Island remain
only half-solved and will perhaps never be fully elucidated.

I have occasionally had recourse to psychological arguments to
explain the energy demonstrated by the Easter Islanders. The
muracle of Easter Island is the audacity that impelled the inhabitants
of a small island, destitute of resources, to raise on the horizon of
the Pacific monuments worthy of a great nation.

Nore: In transcribing native words I have used the spelling adopted in most
recent works dealing with Polynesia. The sound transcribed by ng is a nasalized g.
An inverted comma (‘) between vowels represents the sical stop. All other
letters are pronounced as in Italian.

--- PAGE 22 ---
INTRODUCTION

Easter 1SLAND appeared to us onc ring day during the southern
winter, at the end of July 1934. I can still see the tall cliffs of Poike
peninsula looming through the mist, the rounded mass of the yol-
canocs, and the black, twisted recf bristling with sharp ridges and
needles on which the waves are torn to pieces. There is something

‘ofoundly peaceful and rural about the meadows that stretch far
back into the interior, and the regular and gentle contours of the
hills. In places, their soft pastel the coast of Scania.
The resemblance to Sweden would be complete, if it were not for
the strange, forbidding, diabolical rocks in the foreground.

The commander of the despatch-vessel had called us together on
the poop-deck and given us a picce of bad news: there was a high
sea running on the side of the island where Hanga-roa lay, and
could not guarantee to get our ey packing-cases, which were
cluttering up his hold, safely ashore there. As his instructions did
not specify the part of the island on which he was to land us, he
had decided to set us down, together with our supplies, at any
convenient spot he could find.

Meanwhile, the “Rigault-de-Genouilly’ anchored outside the bay
of Hanga-roa, the only village on the island still inhabited by the
surviving Easter Islanders. A few moments earlier, looking at the
rugged coastline of the northern shore, I had been reminded of far-
away Sweden. Now this first impression was intensified by the
native dwellings we could distinguish through our binoculars,
dotted about close to the shore and imperfectly concealed behind
fig-trees. If we had cherished the dream of secing the classical sil-
houctte of the Polynesian beach rise before us here, we should have
been sadly disillusioned. The capital of the legendary Easter Island
looked for all the world like a humble European hamlet on a rainy
autumn day.

That first day on Easter Island will remain forever engraved in
our memories. The wind, which was blowing in gusts, was driving
great rollers towards the land, and as we drew nearer the reef the
surf assumed increasingly alarming proportions. The natives
massed on the sea-front did not, at first, seem inclined to come out
and meet us. News of our arrival had spread through the village,

5

--- PAGE 23 ---
16 INTRODUCTION

and along all the paths leading to the sea, riders were galloping as
fast as their mounts would carry them. A palaver was in progress
on the beach beside the boathouses, and we watched impatiently as
opinion seemed to sway now this way, now that. We were worried
by the natives’ failure to reach a decision: if they refused to row out
to our ship we should be faced with the disagreeable necessity of
sailing back to the north of the island and landing on a lee shore,
but far from any centre of habitation. It was therefore with great
relic that we saw first one, then two, then three native vessels head-
ing towards us. In the first, steered by the Governor of the island, a
crew of Easter Islanders in Chilean naval uniform was rowing in
perfect unison. The occupants of the other vessels showed more
unagination. These two boats were filled almost to sinking point
with natives sporting rags and tatters of European sorting: The
only exotic note was struck by a few feather head-dresses, which—
far from being relics of a bygone age—were cheapjack goods
intended to arouse the interest of the sailors and stimulate the sale
of the ‘curios’ with which these boats were crammed.

Every time I use the word ‘natives’ to describe the present inhabi-
tals ob Eaieee Island, I experience the same hesitation I felt when
I first saw them, as I leaned on the bulwarks. This term, which
conjures up dark skins and unfamiliar features, seemed hardly
appropriate to these faces that looked so European. How many
nations have mingled their blood with that of the ancient Maoris?
The same story that is repeated at many ports of call could be read
in the faces turned up towards us. What glimpses could we catch
of old Polynesia, of the ancient race of seafarers and learned priests?
There was certainly a hint in the aquiline nose of onc of the helms-
men, in the little pointed beard of a young man with an emaciated
face, and in the beieee forchead of a vendor of statuettes. The
Polynesian heritage was also evident in the softness of their lan-
guage, the mischievous sparkle of their eyes, and in their vivacity
and easy gaiety. They addressed us in English, French and Spanish.
*Soap, soap, bez Licutenant, soap.’ “Two cakes of soap for m:
statuette, and throw in a loaf of bread.’ ‘Your soap is too MN
Chilean soap is bigger. Give me another picce. You are rakerake,
mean. Remember me when you come ashore; I've got a good horse
to take you to the volcano.’

--- PAGE 24 ---
INTRODUCTION 17

In the midst of all this turmoil a great melancholy took possession
of me. Were these shady hucksters the legitimate descendants of
the sculptors of the giant statues and the priests who had peopled
earth and sky with divinities invested with subtle symbols?

The deck was piled high with grotesque statuettes, walking-sticks
and wooden swords. 1 found all these ‘curios’ equally repulsive.
They had replaced the splendid images of former times, carved
with patience and skill from wretched scraps of wood. All that was
left were ridiculous puppets, bartered for a pair of trouscrs or a few
cakes of soup to the accompaniment of mocking laughter.

A rather handande lad, Pedro Atam, who learnt that we
intended to stay on the'island, asked us the reason for our visit. We
explained to him that we were ar ists in search of ancient
objects. He had no difficulty in understanding what we meant, and
declared in a detached tone: ‘There aren't many ancient objects
about nowadays and it will take time to find them. But don’t worry,
we'll make you as many as you want. We'll give you whatever you
ask for. When you get home, nobody will know the difference.’
Pedro, with his moustache and his fine ce, appeared to us on
the threshold of this new world like Satan come to lead us into
temptation. We declined his offer, at the same time ardently hoping
that the specimens his compatriots would offer us might prove to
be genuinely old.

Leaving the Easter Islanders to sort things out with the sailors,
we went to introduce ourselves to the Governor—or Subdel
to give him his correct title. He was in full-dress uniform and
scemed thoroughly dumbfounded by our visit. In a few words, we
told him of our troubles and of the refusal of the Commander of
the ‘Rigaultde-Genouilly’ to land our cases at Hanga-roa. He
promised to arrange everything for us with the assistance of the
natives, and invited us to enter his boat.

Once aboard the latter, we became fully aware of the state of the
sea, We were thrown this way and that and deluged with spray
from the waves that assailed us from side. Truc, the calm
and confidence of the oarsmen dispelled all sense of danger, but

ings deteriorated when we reached the harbour-bar. We had a

sensation of being lifted up above the water, then of a
struggle etween the muscles of our oarsmen and the waves that

--- PAGE 25 ---
18 INTRODUCTION

were pulling us backwards, and finally of hurtling down a tobog-
gan run. A few minutes later we were in calm water alongside a
stone jetty. Since our anxiety had been brief, we felt disposed to
examine the masonry of the leealvatee which was constructed of
rubble from ancient mausoleums, It is all that remains of the monu-
ments described by Cook and La Pérouse. Strong hands pushed us
on to the jetty, and in a few moments we were encircled by a crowd
—chiefly made up of women and children—who addressed us in
the language of Baas Island, Spanish, and English. Soaked to the
skin by the rain and the waves, and still rather dazed by our
crossing, we did not know what to say or do. Our confusion can
also be attributed to the cmotion we experienced at setting foot on
this island that had never ceased to occupy our thoughts during the
long months of the voyage. It was as hard to believe ourselves in
Polynesia now, amidst this mob of women, most of them ugly,
dressed in discoloured clothes that clung to ungraceful bodies, as it
had been a short while before, when we first glimpsed the village of
Hanga-roa through the rain,

An incident occurred to interrupt these moments of uncertainty.
A young woman had approached my colleague and asked him for a
cigarette. He automatically handed her a packet, which she seized
with a furtive movement, making off as fast as her legs could carry
her. This theft delighted us. We were at once transported into the
old atmosphere of the island, as it emerges from the accounts of the
first navigators. Like the sailors of Cook and La Pérouse at the
same spot, we had to protect ourselves against the tendency to Anil
which the Easter Islanders had shown from the first instant of their
contact with white men. We greeted the incident as a good omen,
and felt more inclined to reconcile ourselves to the people and
ae of this little universe into which we had stumbled.

¢ curiosity with which the women and children crowded
round and stared at us left no doubt as to the success of the
we were presenting. Life is monotonous on this island, and the
dor bade ship is an event that provides a topic of conversation for
mon

We saw advancing towards us a hairy little gnome dressed in
clothes obviously too long for him. This curious being extended a
thin, old man’s hand, horny with tilling the soil, and said to us in

--- PAGE 26 ---
INTRODUCTION 19

French, ‘Bonjour, messicurs’. Then 1 recognized Vincent Pons,
about whom I had heard in Chile and whom other travellers had
mentioned in their accounts. Sixty years ago Pons, after sailing all
the South Seas in schooners, had settled on Easter Island, where he
took a wife. Today he is the ancestor of a whole line of strapping
fellows who are reckoned among the toughest customers on the
island. Unfortunately, old Pons never much interest in the
customs of his native family, and he was little help to us with our
enquiries,

We proceeded slowly towards the Subdelegacién—the Governor's
House—followed by our retinue of women and children. In the
midst of the confusion, we caught a glimpse of a face sa i f
whitened with four: this was one of the prettiest girls on the island,
who had smothered herself with rice powder to make herself more
attractive.

Two men were waiting for us near the Goyernor’s ‘Residence’:
Mr Morrison and Mr Smith, the administrators of Messrs William-
son, Balfour & Co, the sheep-farmin company to which the island
belonged. With a few polite words they invited us to take up
quarters at Mataveri, the Company's farm. We accepted gratefully,
knowing very well what this invitation meant to us in terms of
comfort and security. At the entrance to the Subdelegacién the
Governor's wife, quite a pretty young woman, but with drawn
features, was waiting for us with a sickly-looking baby in her arms,
She gaye us a slight smile, completely sapere at the invasion
of her house by a band of men soaked to the skin, A puffy-faced,
unshaven man in pyjamas and slippers introduced himself to us.
This unprepossessing individual was a bankrupt Chilean business-
man who had taken refuge on the island, where he exercised the
dual function of schoolmaster and public scribe. Throughout our
Stay we always saw him in the same pyjamas, and with the same
unshayen face.

As we got wetter and more exasperated by the difficulties of the
landing and the way our cases were being handled, we felt our
courage and our hopes ebbing. Was this the famous Easter Island—
these rather plebcian faces, this mixture of servility and ready
impudence? :

The arrival of Victoria Rapahango—dressed in white, her long

--- PAGE 27 ---
20 INTRODUCTION

wavy hair floating round her shoulders—was enough, however, to
recreate a little of that Polynesian atmosphere from which we had
felt ourselves drifting farther and farther away. A long friendship
did not destroy this first impression. By the distinction of her
manners, her lively good-humour, and her rather sad f ageiere
this woman of the royal tribe of the Miru kept alive in the heart of
the decadent culture of her environment the charm of the old
Oceanian aristocracies,

After a lull, the rain fell with redoubled violence. The whole
island vanished beneath a thick mist and our field of vision was
reduced to a muddy beach and some grim-looking rocks. Our cases
were loaded up in the middle of the crowd, which was still on the
jetty. We received repeated warnings to see that nothing disap-
peared, because ‘these people are eh Giles The incessant pro-
testations of honesty on the part of the natives were scarcely re-
assuring. So we remained on sentry-go, keeping an eye both on the
members of our crew and on the spectators. A few women came
up to us in an embarrassed way and asked in low voices whether
we had any soap. Emboldened by a friendly reply, they then

hints about printed fabrics and ‘ Pompeia’, that vulgar per-
fume which is so highly esteemed in the island.

When dusk fell we made our way to Matayeri along a steep road
bordered by mulberry trees and a low wall of unmortared stones.
At the time, this country spre hich we later came to love—dis-

us by its evocation of things i E . When we
opened the gate te wits eee ont eee ee
a us, and an ungainly individual with a shambling gait
rust into our hands some stone objects that we immediately es
nized as obsidian spearheads. As he handed them to us he said wi
an air of mystery, ‘Re; present’. This was our first present,
our entry into a cycle which we were never again to escape.
By seeping exe modest gifts we laid the foundations of an intri-
cate network of reciprocal obligations which, for the rest of our
By eacrol s vol'geun eaaypen aoe

We en’ a cucalyptus t gives the farm
shade rarely found on this dee: island. Mrs Smith received us
with bustling and delightful hospitality in a large dining-room. We
made the acquaintance of a fair-complexii baby that had just

ee

--- PAGE 28 ---
INTRODUCTION 21

been born in the middle of the Pacific—no doubt the first white to
come into the world in the vicinity of the great states. These
British voices, the lamp on the table, and Mrs Smith, formed a
world apart, as far from Easter Island as Scotland is from the
South Seas. Between these two universes there was no link of sym-
pathy, of mutual understanding, or even of interest, Here the
environment was one of simple honesty: down below a secthing
mass of rather disturbing humanity.

1 was anxious to learn what exactly were the relations between
the Company and the natives. During our stay in Chile we had
been canes: against the Company and had listened to denuncia-
tions of its brutality and selfishness in dealing with the natives.
Many Chileans portrayed in moving terms tragic lot of the
natives confined to a corner of their own island and refused the
right to move about their ancestral lands. We had also been told of
the low wages paid to the few natives employed by the Company.
Long experience of South America had made me familiar withidee
systematic ill-will that surrounds every Anglo-Saxon undertaking;
but, on the other hand, I knew that commercial enterprises are not
always generous to their native labour. To rid myself of any doubts,
I put the question to Mr Smith, who informed me that the Com-
pany paid its workers four pesos plus a daily ration of meat. During
shearing time the women and youngsters engaged for the occasion
were paid piecework rates, that is to say, by the number of sheep
that pass through their hands.

At the time (1934), these wage-levels were higher than those of
Chilean peons. When I repeated to my host the remarks I had heard
concerning the profits made by the Company’s shop, he grew
indignant and assured me that goods were sold in it at wholesale
prices, notwithstanding the cost of transport, and that it gave better
valuc for moncy than could be obtained on the mainland—so much
so that the crews of Chilean vessels seized the o ity of
ping there during shore leave on the island. None the less, the
natives complained of the Company's prices and at the constant
increase in the sums they had to pay for the goods bought in
this shop. Unknown to them, they were the victims of the economic
crisis

in Chile.
When I alluded to the forcible confinement of the natives to the

--- PAGE 29 ---
{

22 INTRODUCTION

village of Hanga-roa and its immediate environs, the Administrator
of the island gaye me the following explanation: ‘Easter Island
belongs to Chile, but in practice it is the private property of Messrs
Williamson, Balfour & Co, who raise sheep on it and also, on a
small scale, cattle and pigs. The pastures and climate of the island
are very favourable to sheep. They multiply here, and today there
are about forty thousand. They are not comparable to New Zealand
sheep, but they produce quite good-quality wool. The flocks would
be easy to look after if it were not for the natives, who rob us all
the time, They seized the first sheep introduced by the missionaries
and would have gone on doing the same thing if we had not taken
precautions. So we have isolated the village and the adjoining coun-
try by barbed wire and have raised a native police force from the
most honest and loyal elements. No one is allowed to cross the field-
fences after sunsct without a special permit. In spite of all this, we
lost three thousand sheep last year. Two days before your arrival
they broke into the farm and stole all the rams. We know the cul-
prits and the police haye got all the facts about the raid, but nobody
was caught red-handed. All our policemen are related either closcly
or distantly to the thieves, and tics of blood prevent them from
denouncing the culprits or arresting them at the op) ¢ moment.

“If we complain to the Governor he pretends to be indignant, he
threatens, promises to punish those responsible—and does absolutely
nothing. Really he is pret by our difficulties and does nothing
to bring them to an end. natives are inveterate rogues. At the
beginning of the year they picked the lock of our and looted
it. We have no more sugar or tobacco or soap, and the next boat
is not due for six months. There is not a child in the village who
does not know the culprits, but how can we get at them? We
haven’t a shred of , and even those who came and denounced
the thieves will swear they said nothing and saw nothing. This
time the Governor was a trifle alarmed, because he too needs our
goods; but after cursing and swearing, he put the matter off till
matiana.

“What angers us is not so much the natives’ attitude to us,
as the hypocrisy of which we are the victims. Chile doesn’t care
about natives—she takes absolutely no interest in them.
We try to stick loyally to our undertakings; we try to be humane;

--- PAGE 30 ---
INTRODUCTION 23

and the result is we are accused of the very abuses we do our best
to avoid.’

The following morning we went down towards the village of
Hanga-roa. On our way we met groups who greeted us with the
Tahitian fa-o-rana. We also passed some of our sailors, astride
wretched nags they had hired for a shirt and a piece of soap. Near
the jetty we made the acquaintance of the man who was destined
to become for us a link between present and past, an oracle we con-
sulted ceaselessly for five months, our informant Juan Tepano. The
first thing that struck us about him was his mischicvous expression.
He was sitting on a rock, with a cotton cap on his head and a pi
in his mouth—the very picture of an ‘old salt’ as imagi By
romantics, There was nothing very Polynesian about his face, He
struck us as being rather like certain old Parisian artists, and he
was not dissimilar in character, Tepano, in fact, considered himself
a skilful sculptor, although his creations were bizarre and pretty
far removed from the traditions of his people.

Juan eg reputation as an authority in ethnographic matters
had spread as far as Chile, where he had been eeserred te as prob-
ably my best source of information. Mrs Routledge already s
of him with esteem, and Macmillan Brown! admits being indebted
to him for the better part of his (rather naive) book on the Pacific
The previous evening, the natives whom we had told of our inten-
tions had mentioned his name again and again. He was living
history, the island’s Baedeker.

listening with a broad smile of satisfaction to a few com-
pliments we paid him on his knowledge and reputation, Tepano
said to us in his sententious voice: ‘Your party will get to know all
about the island and its past. Those who came before could not retain
the words, but they will all be conveyed to you, I know.’ He con-
tinued: “The words of the ancients have been twisted, but you, you
will receive them nape Looking at him as he talked to us, we
were struck by his relatively young and active appearance. We
asked his age, always a diffcue question in a community where
civil records are a recent innovation. Tepano launched out into a
confused explanation from which it emerged that he must be
somewhere around eighty. ‘I’m the oldest man on the island," he

1 The Riddle of the Pacific, ‘T. Fisher Unwin, London, 1924,

--- PAGE 31 ---
4 INTRODUCTION

ke ting. Later, we learned that our first impression had not
Booked us and that Tepano must have been Feat sopveachie ra
sixty; but that day he hee pri interest in making himself out to
be old, as old as the tors of the statues.

He invited us to visit his house, and in his company we entered
the village of Hanga-roa. We followed an avenue of mulberry trees
and came out in a little square facing the church and decorated with
concrete benches, Most of the houses were built of wood with cor-
rugated iron roofs. Everywhere we saw the same look of common-
place poverty. We might well have been in any port in the south of
Chile. Finally, we reached Tepano’s house, which was dis-
tinguished from the rest by having walls of unmortared stone—
‘like the ancient huts’, he told us, not without pride, as he invited
us to enter. To tell the truth, if the house was of stone, it was
because he was too lazy to acquire the planks that would have
enabled him to build a wooden house. He showed us into an ordin-
rs room, furnished with two iron bedsteads and a rickety

. A more picturesque sight awaited us in the next room.
a fire burning on the floor itself, women were busy in front of
cooking-pots, surrounded by a swarm of yelling brats with running
eyes. In a dark corner we distinguished the vague outline of a
human form. It belon, to a strange being, a kind of monster,
with a thousand wrinkles, squatting on a pile of straw, who held
out to us a clawlike hand. This living mummy was Viriamo,
Tepano’s mother, born ‘in the time of the kings’ and now in her
second childhood. Her son, who presented her to us as though she
were a museum piece or an animal in a zoo, informed us that she
was already married in 1864 when the first missionaries landed on
the island. He made us admire the tattooing that covered her legs,
and assured us that in the old days she was in the habit of convers-
ing with ‘devils’. Finally, he declared that he owed the best part
his knowledge to her.

If we had come some een years earlier, this woman would
still have been able to tell us of everyday life in the reed huts. She
would have described to us the festivals on the aha and the rites of
the bird-man, and perhaps she would have the songs
chanted by the priests. Bue the poor woman was now like Easter
Island itself—a body without a soul.

--- PAGE 32 ---
INTRODUCTION 25

The news of our arrival had spread through the village; the
room in which we stood was invaded by a band of young le
who giggled and nudged one another as shy and derisive vi $
will bi anywhere. We were bombarded with questions about the
goods we brought. The moment had come to announce our
intention to pay in clothing for every ancient object offered us. A
few seconds later men returned with bone fish-hooks. The same
evening a woman ni 3 a into our hands, with the greatest '
a splendid stone fish-hook for which she asked a pee of cloth.
Once a bargain had been struck, we noticed that the measles
specimen was a fake. The incident was a lesson to us; for through-
out our stay the Easter Islanders offered us articles counterfeited
with such skill that despite our precautions we were not always able
to avoid being taken in. These imitations of ancient utensils were
often so faithful and their patina so authentic that the forgers
deserved the payment they received for their trouble.

Such was our first contact with Easter Island. Longer acquaint-
ance did little to modify our first impression. A few days later,
accompanied by Tepano and his family, which had been Spi by
Pacomio, we sct up our first camp at the Tepeu ahu. We moved
about ata leisurely pace, staying several weeks at every spot on the
island where the statues were numerous. While my colleague Dr
Lavachery measured and described the ruins, Tepano dictated to
me the legends and traditions connected with the various sites we
were exploring. The last two months were spent in the proximity
of Hanga-roa village, completing our ethnographic material. Drap-
kin, our mission's doctor, devoted teere to peg = natives
and collecting data on dem: hy and physical anthropology.
. Afew s after our ane We oe ractically all the natives

and were kept faithfully up to date with island gossip. Our inform-
ants spoke Spanish, but at the end of two months we were able to
understand them when they addressed us in their native language.
The investigation of the past, which was our Mission's chief pur-
pose, did not leave us the time needed to make an exhaustive study
of the present community of Hanga-roa, The task will undoubtedly
prove extremely important, for it will make it possible to determine
what aspects of the modern life of the island belong to the cultural
heritage of Polynesia, and what aspects are the outcome of the ycars

--- PAGE 33 ---
26 INTRODUCTION

of inter-breeding and contacts with various elements from Europe
and Chile. Sack an enquiry would have to be undertaken by an
ethnographer familiar with Polynesia and capable of discerning

the old native inheritance under the European vencer.

--- PAGE 34 ---
EASTER ISLAND

--- PAGE 35 ---

--- PAGE 36 ---
CHAPTER I

Easter Island and the Lost Continent

Htsrory affords few examples of an indifference to equal that
shown in 1687 by the privateer Edward Davis when, after being
carried five hundred leagues west of Copiapo by the winds and cur
rents of the Pacific, he sighted a sandy behind which were sil-
houetted high mountains. He immediately swung his ship round on
to an casterly course towards Peruvian waters, without making the
slightest effort to find out whether he was the victim of an optical
illusion or the discoverer of a new country.

This ‘Davis Land '—which was much later identified with Easter
Island—confirmed the cosmographers of the period in their convic-
tion that a continent existed in these regions which formed, as it
were, a counterbalance to Asia and Europe. The peaks vaguely
glimpsed by Davis henceforth cast a disproportionately long shadow
over the South Seas. Many generations of navigators vainly scanned
the horizon in search oe Son But the shores of this ‘southern
continent’ persistently evaded discovery. Instead of the sought-for
continent Seneocrable islands were found dotted about the ocean,
the black and brown inhabitants of which seemed to present a
living image of the childhood of the human race.

The great navigators of the cighteenth and carly ninctecnth cen-
turies were succeeded by the crews of the whalers, which, for more
than seventy years, sailed the South Pacific in all directions. They,
in their turn, were never halted in their zigzag courses by the
barrier of an unknown continent.

In the end, the areas formerly occupied by the contours of the
“Terra Australis Incognita’ were painted blue on maps and charts.

But people could not resign themselves to the loss of a continent.
Certain minds hungry for mystery projected the existence of this
world, said to have known the reign of a strange type of humanity
and a civilization many thousands of years old, into a fabulous past.
Of this southern land, they claimed, nothing was left but the moun-
sla esting today form the archipelagos and islands dotted
about Asia and America. By a fortunate chance, monu-

8 29

--- PAGE 37 ---
30 EASTER ISLAND

ments testifying to the splendour of a civilization that had every-
where else ban ganerged by some gigantic cataclysm had been
poet on Easter Island. ‘This explanation of the mystery of
Raster Island has died hard.

But the waters of the Pacific were sounded in vain: nothing was
found there but great deeps. An abyss of 1,145 fathoms extends over
a ten-mile radius round Easter Island: aid could have disap-
peared recently and left such a depression behind it.

Just like Tahiti, the Marquesas or the Hawaiian Islands, Easter
Island—far from being the roof of a submerged world—was born a
few dozen millennia ago as the result of volcanic eruptions. Micro-
scopic analysis of its rocks has not revealed the tiniest particle of an
mineral derived from a continental formation. Its soil and its yol-
canoes are entirely composed of masses of material melted or pul-
verized by the former craters. All these yolcanoes are now extinct,
and they probably ceased to vomit their lava and scoria some
Phcsints of years before any human being discerned them on the
horizon.

The objection may be raised that these submarine cruptions
which create islands may just as well destroy them with equal sud-
denness. In other words, Easter Island—even if it is of volcanic
origin—might conceivably be a relic of a much vaster stretch of
land truncated by volcanic activity. As proof of this cataclysm, some
writers point to the central plain covered with stones of all sizes
that seem to have been hurled forth by the ancient craters. These
scattered fragments, which make walking on the island so tiresome,
do perhaps suggest the action of a cataclysm vast enough to have
wiped out the old civilization of the island. The collapse of the
mausoleum statues has also been attributed to an earthquake accom-
panying this eruption of subterranean fires. Once again, geol

ings us to our senses: these accumulations of basalt stones rete
outcome of a process of disintegration of the lava crust, through the
action of atmospheric agents, that has been going on for thousands
of years. No fire, no volcanic bombardment compelled the sculptors
to abandon their work.

On the other hand, the waves from which Easter Island emerged
are gradually swallowing it up again. Every year they gnaw a little
decper into it, wearing away its cinder cliffs and pouring into its

--- PAGE 38 ---
EASTER ISLAND AND THE LOST CONTINENT 31

craters; in the course of millennia there will be nothing left of Easter
Island but a reef battered by the waves and frequented, like Salas-
y-Gomez, by sea birds.

This slow nibbling at the coastline was demonstrated to us with

ticular clarity by the state of the Ohau ahu, one of the finest
platforms on the island. Its fagade is composed of deli-
catcly adjusted polished slabs, On its inclined plane lic a few
statues, their faces buried in the debris. It is unlikely that this monu-
ment still raises its austere silhouette on the cliff it then dominated.
For when we visited it in 1934 a gaping fissure had already detached
its right wing, and a few rainstorms would have been enough to
send the mausoleum crashing down six hundred feet into the sea.

This crumbling away of the cliffs might be interpreted as the
continuation of a of erosion which, over a period of thou-
sands of years, had reduced a vast territory to minute proportions.
But in fact it is nothing of the sort. Far from suggesting great
antiquity, these subsidences are definite evidence of the compara-
tively recent character of Easter Island civilization. A stroll round
the island makes it abundantly clear that the mausoleums were
intentionally built on the sea-front. If they had been erected many
centuries ago some of them would already have fallen victim to the
waves.

In short, everything gocs to show that when the Polynesians
made their first landing on Easter Island it was very much the same
as it is today: then, as now, it was an insignificant little island
whose triangular shape recalls Sicily, but a miniature Sicily with an
area of about 48,000 acres and sides measuring respectively fifteen,
cleven and ten miles in length.

A different hypothesis has been advanced by Mr Macmillan
Brown, a man with a mind both simple and excessively imagina-
tive. According to him, Easter Island was once the centre of a
smiling archipelago, inhabited by an industrious race, but too arid
for permanent settlement—it served as a collective cemetery for the
populations of the neighbouring islands. As the result of a move-
ment of the earth's crust, the island kingdom vanished into thin
air, leaving as the sole testimony to its existence this bare islet

covered with funi monuments.
There ts'no: fouadesion or this yporteal: Macmillan Brown

--- PAGE 39 ---
32 EASTER ISLAND

claims that Davis Land was his archipelago, which sank between
1687 and 1722; but everything seems to indicate that Davis’s eyes
deceived him—unless he discovered Mangareva, to the west of
Easter Island. And by what miracle could the natives, who have
coy preserved the legend of the ancestral migrations and tribal
wars, have lost all recollection of such a major catastrophe occurring
only a few years before the discovery of the island by Europeans?

The idea of an isle of the dead for the inhabitants of an archi-
pelago is tolerably romantic in itself. The mausoleums, to which
Macmillan Brown attributes an age of thousands of years, were still
being used by the grandparents of the present generation of Easter
Islanders. According to him, the island’s monuments could not
have been carved and erected by a handful of men: their erection
would have required the population of a vast archipelago. But, as
we shall see later, the seven hundred and twenty people now living
on the island represent only about a fifth of the population at the
time of its discovery. Easter Island certainly supported a population
sufficiently large to have executed these masterpieces ol piciioes
statuar y-

A monstrous pumice-stone, an enormous scoria—that is the best
definition of Easter Island. It is pierced all over by caves that open

cavern, like many other of the island’s marvels, is a myth. Never-

--- PAGE 40 ---
CHAPTER II

Easter Island—Polynesian Soil

GENEALOGICAL investigations carried out by our Mission disclosed
an incredible variety of racial intermixtures in the course of the last
fifty years. The inhabitants of Hanga-roa count among their an-
cestors Chileans, Frenchmen, Englishmen, Germans, Italians and
even Americans, who have stayed or put in at the island. This inter-
breeding has produced some very fine results; in particular, there
are some splendid’ specimens of humanity of mixed British and
Easter Island descent. The natives who claimed pure Easter Island
origin—about two hundred—did not fall short of their fellows of
mixed blood in vigour and appearance.

The eighteenth-century navigators found the Easter Islanders
little different from other Polynesians. They had fair complexions,
straight or wavy hair, and wore beards. In short, they looked much
like Europeans.

Some nineteenth-century anthropologists, judging by incomplete
indices or unreliable statistics, declare that Easter skulls closely
resemble those of Melanesia. Volz and Dixon went so far as to
speak of an Australoid element in the island’s racial composition.
Even if Negroid characteristics were manifest in the Easter type,
they could not be taken as proof of two successive occupations by
natives of different races. The Polynesians do not constitute a homo-
geneous population, and in the course of their migrations they have
absorbed Negroid groups, certain of whose hereditary traits have
been very distinctly preserved in some islands.

Measurements taken in 1935 by Dr Harry Shapiro, using subjects
of pure Easter descent, gave results that demolished the hypothesis
of a Melanesian origin and threw into relief the close affinities of
the Easter type with other Polynesian types. In one particular, how-
ever, they occupy a place apart: on the average, their heads are
longer than anywhere else in Polynesia. This peculiarity of their
cephalic index suggests that they may be the purest representatives
of an ethnic layer which, having been replaced in Central Polynesia
by shorter-skulled invaders, continued to exist on the periphery of

33

--- PAGE 41 ---
34 EASTER ISLAND

its former domain. Moving eastwards from Tahiti, the length of
the cranium perceptibly increases, till it reaches its maximum on
Easter Island. :

Dark pigmentation of the skin and fuzzy hair—the most persist-
ent signs of a Negroid heredity—are rarer on Easter Island an on
the other islands inhabited by Polynesians. It is the same with noses
and lips of the ‘Melanesian’ type.

Linguistics do not contradict the data of physical anthropology.
The speech of Easter Island is a pure Polynesian dialect, free from
elements borrowed from any other family of languages; it is similar
to Mangarevan and Marquesan, of which it seems to be an archaic
form.

Some authors have placed the beginnings of Easter Island culture
very far back in the past, totall disregarding the lists of the great
chiefs that have been it eg at various times. These go from
King Hotu-matu‘a, who discovered and colonized the island, to
little Gregorio, who died at the Mission of the Fathers of the Sacred
Heart in 1866. The lists do not always agree, and they often include
the names of deities and even the wives of certain kings. After care-
fully sifting them we were able to establish that the number of
ariki-mau, or sacred chiefs, who had succeeded one another from
mythical times to the present day was about thirty. Allowing an
average of twenty-five years for the duration of each reign—the
accepted figure in Polynesian ethnography—this puts Hotu-matu‘a’s
voyage somewhere in the twelfth century. It was during this cen-
tury that the Polynesians swarmed from the Society Islands and the
Marquesas to settle in the Gambiers, the Hawaiian Islands and
New Zealand.

Even supposing—which is unlikely—that the first statues were
erected shortly after Hotu-matu’a’s landin » the most ancient would
be scarcely seven hundred years old. This is a +e way from the

thousands of years with which they have rather ivolously been
credited.

the means of navigation at the Polynesians’ disposal, and imagi
areas of land have been made to rise in the middle of the Pacific to
explain this people’s vast dispersion. Such fantasies cannot deprive

--- PAGE 42 ---
EASTER ISLAND—POLYNESIAN SOIL 35

the Polynesians of the glory of having discovered, in their outrigger
canoes, all the islands, high and low, scattered within the immense
triangle with its apexes in New Zealand, Hawaii and Easter Island.

To understand an historical event fully it is not enough to know
its cause and development: we must also reconstruct the psycho-
logical climate. This is no longer possible in the case of Easter
Island; but the annals of Mangareva, painstakingly noted down by
Father Laval, afford valuable background information regarding
the various Polynesian migrations in the archipelagos next to Easter
Island.

Emigration was not merely a physical necessity see by a
conqueror on a vanquished group: it was also the only honourable
solution for men of courage whom defeat had stripped of their
prestige and their lands. When a young Mangarevan chief hesitated
to follow out to sea his sovereign who had resolved to leave his
island, his mother improvised the following song to encourage him -
and make him ashamed of his hesitations:

O Tupu! O my King!
The dull groaning of the reefs makes itself heard under the wind
Behind Hararuru. It is for you they are moaning.

O Tupu! O my King!
Alas! You have disappeared with seven canoes.

O Tupu! O my King!
One of them is still left, it is the double canoe of Mapukutaora.
What is it going to do? ,

O Tupu! O my King!

The young chief obeyed the voice of the waves and left in search
of Tupu, his king.

Another vanquished chief, Mata-puku, accompanied by his son,
sought refuge with his married daughter living among another
tribe. There the fugitives were ordered to go and fish: ‘When Mata-

. puku saw his son doing the work of a servant, steering the canoe,
is face lashed by the waves, he was filled with grief at the thought
that they were both in a state of servitude. They resolved to seck
another island where the shame of defeat would no longer weigh
openly upon them. They asked for a canoe, which was immediately
given them, for, according to the ideas of the country, no one could

--- PAGE 43 ---
36 EASTER ISLAND

live on without avenging himself or confiding himself to the mercy
of the waves.’

“To the mercy of the waves’—no expression could more accur-
ately convey the character of these maritime adventures. The emi-
grants sailed blindly, straight ahead, in the hope of reaching some
island beyond the horizon.

Hundreds of Polynesian chiefs must have roamed the sea until
their canoes were no more than hulks, filled with the dead and
dying. Others perished in storms. But a few landed on ‘oases of the
sea’, which they conquered for man.

These primitive flotillas setting out for unknown lands left the
homeland amidst a joyful and festive tumult. Various stories des-
cribe the lamentations of those remaining behind, and the last
wishes addressed to one another by the two parties. Those who
were leaving made it a point of honour to affect an ‘air of triumph
and joy’, to demonstrate their faith in a better destiny ahead,

At the moment of departure, everyone decked himself out in his
finest ornaments and covered his hair with garlands of flowers.
Decorated as though for a festival, the canoes moved slowly out to
sea; at the stern, one of the priests sang and danced the ‘last fare-
well to the fatherland’, while saluting in advance the land ‘they
were secking beyond the horizon’.

By what name did Hotu-matu‘a greet the island he had dis-
covered? The modern natives call their island Rapa-nui, but this
name is of quite recent origin. It means Great Rapa, and was given
to Easter Island by Tahitian sailors struck by certain resemblances
between Easter Island and Rapa.

Many writers employ for this island, which they claim to have
been the centre of an empire, the esoteric name Te Pito-te-henua,
“The Navel of the World’. This high-sounding epithet bestowed
upon a little triangular rock is not, as might have been supposed,
pure invention. Pito, the word transla as ‘navel’, also means
‘end’, while henua is the normal word for ‘earth’. Pito-te-henua is
actually the name of one of the island’s three headlands and sig-
nifies no more than ‘Land’s End’.

A third name, Hiti-ai-terangi, has been Proposed. This is the
name by which Easter Islanders being repatriated from Peru re-
ferred to their island when speaking to other Polynesians on the

--- PAGE 44 ---
EASTER ISLAND—POLYNESIAN SOIL 37

boat. But the name scems to have been unknown to the native
Petes dferences of opinion on sucha simple subject may appear
T ifferences of opinion on a sim ject may aj
a tifle strange. In sual é fact, the island that as call after
the day on which he discovered it had probably never had a name,
Every one of its bays and rocks bore a name, but not the island as
a whole. As isolated on it as though.they were alone in the world,
the Easter Islanders probably never felt any need for a name by
which to distinguish their country from others, of which they had
no knowledge.

--- PAGE 45 ---
CHAPTER III

The Tragic Story of Easter Island

Destiny seems to have been bent on destroying every piece of
evidence on Easter Island that would have enabled us to solve its
riddles. The island was baptized with the blood of its children; and,
as though this massacre had been an omen for the future, it was the
scene, in the middle of last century, of one of the most hideous
atrocities committed by white men in the South Seas.

On Easter Sunday 1722, the Dutch Admiral Roggeveen, on board
the ‘Arena’, discovered an island which he took to be Davis Land
—although nothing in its appearance tallied with the brief descrip-
tion left by the famous buccaneer. As the ‘Arena’ drew closer,
various signs of habitation could be distinguished. It was not until
the following day, however, that the first contact was made between
the islanders and the Dutch. A native came aboard in the most
matter-of-fact manner and without showing the slightest trace of
astonishment. His friendly air and graceful movements won him
universal good-will. For his part, he seemed mainly interested in
the ship and its rigging. He walked up and down the deck, touch-
ing the and gazing curiously at the masts and cannons. There
was nothing of the ‘savage’ terrified by supernatural beings about
him: he behaved like a man absorbed by new technical problems.
He lost his composure only when he caught sight of his reflection in
a mirror. With an instinctive movement, he jumped forward to
seize the companion whom he suspected of having surreptitiously
aes in front of him. The Dutch tried various other experiments
in the hope of amusing themselves at his expense. The ship’s orches-
tra played a tune to test his ear for music. At the first notes, the
Easter Islander began to dance. So much trust and good humour
gained him many presents, which he took with him when he swam
away.

His example and his stories encouraged the rest, and soon the
ship was invaded by a noisy band of visitors. They laughed, were
delighted with everything and were getting on wonderfully with the
Dutchmen, when suddenly there was the sound of a chase and of

38

--- PAGE 46 ---
THE TRAGIC STORY OF EASTER ISLAND 39

bodies diving into water. Some of the natives had robbed the sailors
of their caps and jumped overboard with their booty. Then the
Admiral’s table-cloth disappeared through the window of his cabin.
These first petty thefts initiated a tradition in relations between
natives and foreign visitors that has not been lost.

In the afternoon the Dutch went ashore. The crowd massed on
the beach behaved in the most incoherent manner. While some
made gestures of friendship and seemed delighted by the visit,
others wore a hostile expression and picked up stones. This marked
contrast characterized the natives’ attitude on the occasion of every
subsequent European landing on the island.

The shore party were advancing calmly, when suddenly the cry
rang out: “Fire, now’s the moment.’ There was a crackle of musket
shots, and when the smoke cleared several natives lay groaning on
the sand—among them the gay companion who had been the first
to venture aboard the ‘Arena’. What had happened exactly? No
doubt a soldier, cai See by some petty theft or frightened by a
threatening gesture, had given way to fear and provoked this sense-
less massacre. The crowd, which had broken up, returned, but this
time timid and humble, imploring forgiveness for a crime of whose
nature they were unaware. Standards were presented to the strang-
ers in token of respect. But the latter were nervous and ill at ease
on this beach they had just sprinkled with blood. They cast a glance
at the huts made of branches, picked up a few tubers, and retired
as fast as they could to their boats.

In the midst of the tumult and confusion, the Dutchmen had
caught sight of some strange monuments which they later discussed
at length. They wondered how ‘naked savages’ could have put up
these colossi, and finally decided that these ‘idols’ must have been
made of clay. This was the first solution offered to the mystery of
Easter Island.

The island discovered by Roggeveen was forgotten for ears.
Seafarers continued to look for Davis Land, ae
that seemed to recede as fast as the Pacific unveiled its mysteries.
Spain, worried about her American colonies, emerged from her
lethargy and sent ships to annex these territories next door to her
overseas domains.

Easter Island was discovered for the second time, in 1770, by

--- PAGE 47 ---
40 EASTER ISLAND

Felipe Gonzdlez y Haedo, who anchored there for several days and
sent a boat party round the island, which made a very accurate map
of it. Before the Spaniards left, a shore in full dress uniform
sct up three great crosses on the Poike hills. There was no clash,
The natives indulged in a deal of pilfering, but they made up
for these misdeeds by the liberty they allowed their women. Young
girls calmly offered themselves to the Spaniards, who were out-
raged by the cynicism shown by the men on this occasion.

annexation of the island—which the Spaniards named San
Carlos—to the kingdom of Spain was proclaimed in a deed that was
read out to the natives. Following an old Spanish custom dating
from the conquest of America, the latter were invited to put their
marks at the foot of the document as'a sign of consent. The
islanders readily agreed to this request. They scribbled a few lines
on the paper, doubtless in imitation of the script in which the manu-
Script was written. One of them, however, drew a bird in the style
that appears on the tablets and petroglyphs,

The reception which the Easter Islanders accorded, four years
later, to Captain Cook (1774) differed little from the welcome they
had given his pi rs. They were full of high spirits, friendly,
peal astoereity and audaciously dishonest, The baskets of sweet

tatoes they offered in barter were weighted with stones, and they

Iched the goods for which they had already been paid and sold
them a second time. These little tricks did not ways go un-
lene an angry officer fired on one native who had stolen a bag

om him. The women, somewhat more shy, distributed their
favours for trifling gifts ‘in the shadows cast by the giant statues’.

Captain Cook's brief visit brought Easter Island the celebrity it
has never ceased to enjoy up to the present day. In the story of his
voyage the great explorer describes the giant statues standing up-
right or fallen flat on top of mausoleums, whose sundered stones
revealed the bleached skeletons within. He draws a vivid picture of
the contrast between these grandiose relics and the bare little patch
of land covered with scoriae and inhabited by a sparse and impover-
ished population.

In 1786, a French expedition commanded by the Comte de La
Pérouse landed on Easter Island. They stayed only twenty-four
hours—long enough to bestow on this strange and grim piece of

--- PAGE 48 ---
THE TRAGIC STORY OF EASTER ISLAND 41

land a little of the delicate and ironic charm of the dying century.
La Pérouse was a sensitive soul. The truc son of an age well dis:
d towards the ‘noble savage’, this courteous and cultivated

‘rench aristocrat believed that a stolen cap or handkerchief was not
worth the life of the poor children of nature who purloined them
with such ingenuity. He also concluded, very reasonably, that he
could not undertake to re-educate them in a few hours. The best
thing, he thought, was to laugh at the ruses the islanders employed
in robbing him. To avoid all pretext for the violence that was
always to be feared from a crew of rough sailors, he announced
that he would replace the stolen caps himsclf. The natives took
advantage of this windfall. They must have noticed the strangers’
interest in their women, and they exploited their guests’ weakness
to the full. While the young girls were leading the sailors on, the
men relieved them of their caps and handkerchiefs. La Pérouse
took a lenient view of the situation. He distributed medals to those
whom he took to be chicfs; but in reality these were the most arrant
thieves, and although ‘they pretended to go in pursuit of those who
had stolen the sailors’ hanikerchicts, it was easy to sec that it was
with the definite intention of not catching them.’ Looting reached
such a pitch that the Frenchmen were sometimes obliged to fire
blank cartridges or small shot.

La Pérouse made a number of observations that are not lacking
in subtlety and remain true of the modern Easter Islanders: ‘It is
certain,’ he says, ‘that these people do not have the same ideas about
theft as ourselves; they probably do not attach any shame to it; but
they know very well that they are committing an unjust act, since
they immediately flee. Their physiognomy does not express a single
genuine fecling: he who was most to be mistrusted was the Indian
to whom one had just given a present and who appeared most
anxious to render a thousand little services.’ La Pérouse noticed
their inquisitiveness and open minds and the lively interest they
took in navigational matters. Those who came on board examined
the cables, he anchors, the compass and the steering-wheel, They
came back again later with a piece of string and measured the ship:
no doubt there had been some discussion ashore on this subject, and
they wished to clear up uncertainties.

A famous drawing set appears in La Pérouse’s Voyages shows

--- PAGE 49 ---
42 EASTER ISLAND

the natives sitting at the foot of the great statues purloining the
French officers’ and sailors’ kit. This was the visitors’ only revenge.
We showed the modern Easter Islanders a reproduction of this
picture. Their reaction is not without interest: first, they found the
exploits of their ancestors extremely comical, and the simpletons
who were allowing themselves to be robbed highly ridiculous. What
struck them most, however, were the good ees of the women,
whom the artist had treated according to the conventions of his
period. They saw in them a confirmation of their racial possess:
the women of days gone by were whiter and had firmer breasts and
‘deeper navels’ than those of today. These remarks were also an
indication of the ideal of feminine beauty held in the island. After-
wards women often came and asked us to show them the portraits
of their grandmothers. They gazed at them for a long time and
generally commented: ‘How black and ugly we have become now.”

In 1808 a crime was committed on Easter Island that fore-
shadowed the fate awaiting the rest of the population half a century
later. An American ship, the ‘Nancy’, carried off twelve men and
ten women after a bloody battle. These unfortunates were taken
down into the holds and put in irons, The trader's intention was to
land them on Masafuera Island, where he hoped to employ them as
slaves in seal-hunting. When the ship was three days’ sail from
Easter Island, he had his captives brought up on deck and their
chains removed. The moment they were free of their bonds, men
and women leapt into the water and began to swim with te
vigour. The captain, imagining that the waves would force them to
come back on board, stopped his ship and watched from afar the
discussion that broke out among them as to the right direction to
take. Being unable to agree, some made off towards Easter Island
while the others swam towards the south. Boats were lowered and
an attempt made to recapture them, but they refused to come
aboard and continually evaded capture by diving under the water.
Tired of chasing them, the sailors left them to their fate.

It is not surprising if other ships putting in at Easter Island after
this date were greeted with hostility. Nevertheless, curiosity and
trust generally regained the upper hand, and in the middle of
aggressive demonstrations the natives could not restrain themselves
from giving free rein to their gaicty and their naive desire to con-

--- PAGE 50 ---
THE TRAGIC STORY OF EASTER ISLAND 43

verse with the strangers. The arrival, in 1816, of the Russian nayi-
gator Kotzebue, whose ship was the ‘Rurick’, was the pretext for
extraordinary scenes. The first boat to come ashore was surrounded
by a group anxious to barter tubers for nails. The bargain was
struck amidst disorder and confusion, of which more than one
islander took advantage to steal everything within reach. When the
other boats ventured on to the beach, the excitement of the natives
reached fever pitch: ‘They shouted and jumped about, making the
queerest gestures.’ Still laughing and joking, they blocked the only
little beach on which the Russians could have landed, and forced
them to put out to sea again. The din of their chatter was ear-
splitting; they all talked at once and indulged in jokes that caused
roars of laughter from the crowd. Finally, they tired of this game
and began to throw stones at the sailors. After a shot had dis; sed
them ‘like a flock of sparrows’, the Russians disembarked. The
uproar then became so intense that the officers had to shout to make
themselves heard by their men. The leaping and dancing of the
black- and red-painted warriors constituted an appalling spectacle
that terrified the leader of the landing party. He confessed later that
he had imagined himself to be surrounded by a band of monkeys.
He gave the order to fire blank cartridges. At the first salvo, the
natives took refuge behind rocks; “but when the noise had passed
and they realized that they were unhurt, they came out from their
hiding-places laughing and making fun of the strangers.’

Kotzebue was also unwilling at first to ‘take revenge for the
pleasantries of these grown-up children’, but he thought it advisable
to beat a retreat, and even to fire a few bullets, when he was struck
uy a stone. A few hours later, the ‘Rurick’ left Easter Island waters..
If it had not been for these incidents, Easter Island might have left
a mark on German literature, for among Kotzebue’s companions
was Adalbert yon Chamisso, the Romantic poet.

The English navigator Beechey was welcomed to Easter Island in
much the same way as Kotzebue had been, but his account is
coloured by a few picturesque details concerning the peculiar charm
of the South Seas. “

Beechey sent two boats ashore; clusters of swimmers fought to
get to them and threw presents to the sailors. Yams, bananas and
sugar cane rained down on them, together with wooden images

--- PAGE 51 ---
44 EASTER ISLAND

and fishing-nets. The number of swimmers clinging to the oars and
rudders was so great that they brought the whalers to a standstill.
They all wanted to clamber aboard, especially the women. There
was no provocative or coquettish gesture in which they did not in-
dulge in order to persuade the sailors to take them on board. One
of the boats ended up by being so overloaded that it almost sank;
the seamen had to beat off this aquatic crowd that came back again
as soon as it had been driven away. The contents of the boat were
pillaged without anyone being able to arrest the looters, who dived
into the water like porpoises. The women committed no thefts, but
they were in league with the thieves: their job was to distract the
rowers’ attention by their caresses and suggestive attitudes. The
Englishmen decided to take stern measures: no women were
allowed into the boats except one young girl, who could not swim
as well as the others and whose father lifted her into the whaler.
With a kindly smile the officer let her sit beside him. The girl was
wearing nothing but a grass skirt; feeling this costume to be inade-
quate in her present situation she calmly took possession of an
officer’s jacket, after which she started to sing. In no way jealous of
the favoured treatment she had been accorded, the girl tried to help
her friends aboard by pulling them out of the water by their hair,
until she was forbidden to continue for fear the boat might capsize
again.

“As our party passed,’ writes Becchey, ‘the assemblage of females
on the rock commenced a song, similar to that chaunted by the lady
in the boat; and accompanied it by extending their arms over their
heads, beating their breasts, and performing a variety of gestures,
which showed that our visit was acceptable, at least to that part of
the community. When the boats were within wading distance of
the shore, they were closely encompassed by the natives; each bring-
ing something in his hand, however small, and almost every one
importuning for an equivalent in return. All those in the water
were naked, and only here and there, on the shore, a thin cloak of
the native cloth was to be seen. Some had their faces painted black,
some red; others black and white, or red and white, in the ludicrous
manner practised by our clowns; and two demon-like monsters
were painted entirely black. It is not easy to imagine the picture
that was presented by this motley crowd, unrestrained by any

--- PAGE 52 ---
THE TRAGIC STORY OF EASTER ISLAND 45

authority or consideration for their visitors, all hallooing to the ex-
tent of their lungs, and pressing upon the boats with all sorts of
grimaces and gestures.

“It was found impossible to land where it was at first intended:
the boats, therefore, rowed a little to the northward, followed by the
multitude, and there effected a disembarkation, aided by some of
the natives, who helped the party over the rocks with one hand,
while they picked their pockets with the other.’

‘An officer fired a shot to clear the beach, but the report had less
effect than the water poured on the people in front by those at the
back, who were impatient to enjoy the spectacle. The tumult on
the seashore surpassed all imagination. The natives handed the
Europeans empty sacks, in the hope that they would be given then
back full of presents. At the first signs of hostility the landing party
beat a retreat. Perhaps this movement was interpreted as a sign of
fear or enmity. Whatever the reason, matters took a nasty turn
immediately afterwards. Showers of stones rained down on the
sailors, many of whom were seriously injured. The young island
girl in the boat, knowing her compatriots’ marksmanship, showed
no sign of alarm; an officer had to throw her overboard into safety.
Finally, the sailors fired on the crowd, and a chief was hit. Taking
advantage of the panic, the Englishmen were able to push out their
boats and jump aboard.

Thus ended the last visit that Easter Island received from a
European navigator who still preserved the humane traditions of
the great travellers of the eighteenth century.

Admiral Dupetit-Thouars sailed past Easter Island in 1838. He
only anchored long enough to receive on board a few natives who
treated the crew to an exhibition of dancing. One woman amongst
the visitors had provided herself in advance with a basket in which
to put the presents she anticipated from the sailors’ generosity.
Some years earlier, Moerenhout had anchored off the island on his
way from Chile to Tahiti and had received a visit from a native
who, once aboard, invited the crew to come and frolic with the
women on the seashore.

Before the visits of Moerenhout and Admiral Dupetit-Thouars
another crime had been committed. The whaler ‘Pindos’ sighted
Easter Island in 1822. Boats sent ashore to procure women and fresh

--- PAGE 53 ---
46 EASTER ISLAND

vegetables returned with as many girls as there were men on board.
The next day they were taken off in the same boats, and when the:
were fairly close to the shore they were forced to jump overboard.
‘The boats remained stationary, to watch these unfortunate girls
swimming with onc hand as they did their best to hold above water
with the other the trinkets they had received for prostituting them-
selves, and perhaps carrying with them the germs of a disease that
might cost their lives. As they came ashore they were received
by groups gathered in a crowd on the strand; it was then that the
skipper, without any provocation and apparently for the sole
pleasure of killing, took his gun and fired into the midst of them—
as a parting gesturc—with the marksmanship characteristic of the
men of his country. It was immediately evident from the confusion
reigning round one poor Indian who fell that the shot had found
its mark. He then gave the order to row, and moved off with a
smile on his lips and congratulating himself on his good shoot-
ing....’

The year 1862 was decisive in the history of Easter Island, It saw
the end of its civilization, most aspects of which have become for us,
since the middle of the nineteenth century, as vague and far-off as
though we were separated from them by the mists of time.

In 1859 exploitation of the ere deposits on the Chile coast was
an extremely preeperone undertaking, handicapped by only one
obstacle—the of labour. Fatigue, undernourishment and
epidemics decimated the unfortunate lal '$ com) to do this
exhausting work on arid, sun-scorched islets. The companies
recruited their workmen with the aid of adventurers who employed
force or cunning as occasion demanded. These new-style slave-
traders made a full-scale expedition to Easter, of all Polynesian
islands the closest to Peru. A flotilla arrived off Hangaroa Bay on
December 12, 1862, The few islanders who unsuspectingly came
aboard were immediately seized, chained and thrown into the hold.
As no one else presented himself, the Peruvian slavers, went ashore
and drove all the natives they could find to the beach with gunshots.
The islanders were too terrified to offer much resistance.

According to another version of this slave raid, the Peruvian
traders attracted the islanders to the shore by a display of presents,
and then, at a given signal, slew and captured a great number of

--- PAGE 54 ---
THE TRAGIC STORY OF EASTER ISLAND 47

them, In 1914, at the time of Mrs Routledge’s voyage, there were
still some old men who remembered these scenes. They described
the gunshots, the flight of the women and children, and the
lamentations of the captives as they were held down on the gro!

and tied like animals—in short, mt the horrors of the slave raids in
black Africa. Among the prisoners were King Kamakoi and his

On reaching Peru this miserable cargo of human flesh was imme-
diately sold to the guano companies. In a few months disease, ill-
treatment and homesickness had reduced the nine hundred or a
thousand natives taken into slavery to about a hundred. Thanks to
the intervention of Monscigneur Jaussen, the French Government—
backed by the British—made representations to Peru. The Peruvian
Government ordered the repatriation of the handful of Easter
Islanders who had survived these months of forced labour. te

but most of them died on the way from tuberculosis or smallpox.
Only fifteen regained the island, to the Sect misfortune of the
population that had been left behind: shortly after their return,
smallpox, the germs of which they had brought with them, broke
out and transformed the island into a vast charnel-house. Since

probably belonged to the unfortunate people who died at this period.
Civil wars added their toll to the havoc wrought by this mur-
derous epidemic. The social order had been undermined, the fields
were lefe without owners, and people fought for possession of them.
‘Then there was famine. The population fell to around six hundred.
The majority of members of the priestly class disappeared, taking
with them the secrets of the past. The following ycar, when the first
missionaries settled on the island, they found a culture in its death
throes: the religious and social system had been destroyed and a
leaden apathy weighed down the survivors from these disasters.

This people without past or future, physically and morally broken,
was won over to Christianity, if not without effort, at least in a
short time. In Flange-oa cemetery there isa stone slab bearing the
inscription:

--- PAGE 55 ---
8 EASTER ISLAND

L'ILE DE PAQUES
AU FRERE EUGENE EYRAUD
QUI D'OUVRIER MECANICIEN
DEVINT OUVRIER DE
DIEU ET EN FIT LA
CONQUETE POUR JESUS-CHRIST

This brief inscription sums up the whole life of the apostle to the
Easter Islanders. This earnest and decply religious young man, who
exiled himself to Argentina to pay tor the studies of his brother
destined for the priesthood, had a strange career. He was a mech-
anic by trade, but the harsh necessities of emigration compelled him
to follow many occupations up to the time when he crossed the
Andes and settled in Chile. There he led an exemplary life, devot-
ing himself to the well-being of his family. The destiny of his
brother—a missionary in China—fired his imagination, and he
longed to join him and share his labours. One day he invited into
his shop two pean priests, whom he had recognized from their
appearance to be Frenchmen, and learned from them that he could
dedicate himself to missionary work without having taken holy
orders. He became a novice with the Fathers of the Holy Spirit and
left Chile in 1862, in the company of other missionaries, to under-
take the spiritual conquest of Easter Island.

The littic band proceeded first to Tahiti, where they learned of
the raid that had just been inflicted on Easter Island. In the face of
this terrible disaster, the missionaries hesitated to embark on an
undertaking that seemed to have become pointless, But Eyraud
refused to be discouraged; he announced that, if necessary, he
would settle alone on the island among the survivors, to prepare the
way for the priests who would join him later. His proposal was
accepted, and the schooner took him to Easter Island with car-
reek tools, a barrel of flour, cuttings of trees, five sheep and a

the last-named object doubtless being in his eyes the most
important. Eyraud was accompanied by an Easter Islander named
Pana, who had been carried off by slavers but had managed to
escape. The two of them reached their destination on January 2, ~
1864. Pana wanted to be landed in the bay of Anakena, where he
was born, but the master of the schooner preferred that of Hanga-

--- PAGE 56 ---
THE TRAGIC STORY OF EASTER ISLAND 49

roa. A Mangarevan was sent ashore to investigate. He returned in a
state of abject terror, asserting that he had seen on the beach a
thousand demons, their faces painted red and black, who leapt into
the air shouting and threatened him with their weapons. Rushing
up to Eyraud, he gasped: ‘I would not go ashore again for a thou-
sand piastres. They are horrible-looking people. They are threaten-
ing .. . and smallpox is ravaging the island. ... You cannot possibly
land, you would risk losing the boat and catching the disease. . . -
The captain will take you back to Tahiti free of charge.’ These in-
coherent words sowed panic on board. Everyone was in favour of
standing out to sea immediately. Eyraud alone was opposed to this
and demanded to be put ashore. The longboat was sent out for the
second time, to set him down on the beach along with the native
who had accompanied him. A milling crowd was waiting for them.
In the uproar that broke out the moment they landed, Eyraud saw
his companion’s belongings looted. It had been agreed with the
captain that he would make his way on foot to Anakena, where his
luggage would be put ashore the following day; but the crowd
would not let him leave, and every time he and Pana tried to escape
they were forcibly dragged back into the middle of the throng. Pana
succeeded in gaining the support of the warriors, and under their
protection Eyraud was able to reach Anakena after an exhausting
march across lava-fields and through tall grass.

Next day the schooner, after fetching about in sight of Anakena
without coming inshore, disappeared over the horizon. For Eyraud
this was a moment of utter despair. The ship was carrying away all
his possessions and, more important still, ‘a Tahitian catechism
with which to teach the Kanakas prayers and the fundamental
truths of religion’. :

In the evening good news came. The missionary’s effects had
been landed in Hanga-roa Bay. To avoid losing them, Eyraud had
to retrace his steps across the island over the fields of stones. Before
setting out, he inaugurated his ministry: in the presence of an audi-
ence and with all possible solemnity he said a prayer in the Kanaka
language.

The first thing he saw on arriving at Hanga-roa was his hat on
the head of one warrior and his frock-coat on the back of another.
The natives gathered round his portable hut were engaged in a

--- PAGE 57 ---
5° EASTER ISLAND

lively argument, some saying the sections were of a boat, the
rest Cebus various oe purposes to them. Wh hen the discus-
sion became heated Eyraud saw an opportunity to regain possession
of his belongings. He offered to settle the dispute by giving a public
demonstration of the real function of these picces of timber. To
everyone's amazement, he put up his house. The same evening he
had a dwelling-place, and everything that had not already been
stolen was stowed away in safety.

Eyraud shows his perspicacity when he tells us in his letters that
the toleration he enjoyed was duc above all to the free spectacle he
offered to public curiosity. All by himself, he was a circus and a
zoo. The natives came in groups to watch him, and his every move-
ment provoked laughter or endless comments. In disillusionment he
writes: ‘I am the stranger, the papa, whom everyone wants to
know, to see working, and above all to exploit.’ Nevertheless, the
natives’ inquisitiveness could be turned to account. He was con-
stantly surrounded by an audience ready to listen to him, and he
made use of it to spread the gospel. He even had some pupils, for
whorm his lessons were a new sort of pastime. He good-humouredly
admits this: ‘Whether you are ready or not, Mr Teacher or Brother
Catechist, here come your pupils. They knock at the door; if I come
out straight away, well and good, the class begins on the grass in
front of the hut. But if I keep them waiting, or tell them to come
back later because they seem to me more inclined to amuse them-
selves than to learn, they do not waste the opportunity. After knock-
og beled ge tbe fener tay ser yor chew Becca's
a little way off and throw stones, first little ones, then bigger ones,
to ad the game interesting.

“Whether the catechist feels like it or not, he must show himself.
So 1 go out armed with my catechism, sit down on the grass and
say to them: “Come over here, we are going to learn some prayers,”
“No,” reply the pupils, “you come over here.” The SESS thing
iis the geil narry they repeated

was ers or the
sponses of the catechism in chorus. One ad Be ae this seeely
mechanical mode of instruction was well received by the islanders.
The newcomer was conforming to the tradition of the rongorongo
or pagan chanters, who taught the ritual chants, Was not Eyraud

--- PAGE 58 ---
THE TRAGIC STORY OF EASTER ISLAND 5r

simply a new kind of priest teaching them different magic spells?
The class was not always docile. The pupils quickly tired, and
Eyraud often found himself alone on the beach. But he was not
deserted for long, since, as he himself remarks, ‘there are few
occupations, few distractions; they soon knock at the papa’s door
and say: “Teach us to pray.”

There can be no doubt that those who had assimilated the prayers
felt that they had gained power by learning these magic ay and
their confidence in Eyraud was notably enhanced in consequence.

One day, Eyraud went into his hut to write a letter, while a ship
was sailing past the island. Everyone was convinced that he had
sent his spirit to his compatriots, and they asked him in all serious
ness what news he had received from the vessel.

After some months several of the islanders could spell, five or six
were able to read, and a certain number of adults and children had
learnt to say prayers. Brother Eyraud had a ri ht to be satisfied with
his handiwork: ‘I had survived, and I was listened to.’

Life on a Polynesian island is delightful as long as peace reigns;
but if the families or tribes take up arms against one another, it
becomes difficult to keep outside the conflict and avoid unpleasant-
ness,

Eyraud was annexed by a matato‘a, a war-chief of the island. He
tells us how this came about. The chief of a neighbouring bay came
with a gift of three chickens, No sooner had Eyraud received them
than a powerfully built man stepped forward and, without so much
as a by-your-leave, took them away ‘to relieve him of them’, “He
did relieve me of them,’ adds Eyraud, not without malice, ‘and
during the nine months and nine days of my stay on Easter Island
this rum customer continued, with t persistence, to relieve me
on evi ible occasion of everything had brought with me,
although it was not bothering me at all.

The man who had thus burst into Eyraud’s existence was Toro-
meti, his ‘evil genius’, as he describes him. Evil genius? Not
entirely, for in exchange for his petty thefts Torometi offered
Brother Eyraud the protection of himself and his peo le, His
motives are obscure: no doubt he was activated by cupidity, but
reasons of policy certainly played some part in his hain Ke his
tribe must have derived advantages from disposing of the person of

6905

--- PAGE 59 ---
52 EASTER ISLAND

this priest who was more powerful than those wnkg ee the island.

On the morrow of this memorable day, Eyraud had to open all
his trunks and display his treasures. Torometi modestly contented
himself with a small axe. To console his protégé for his loss, he told
him in a detached tone that he might borrow it from time to time.
Torometi hankered after the bell, but he consented to be reasonable
and merely took possession of a small hand-bell, the tinkling of
which ‘subsequently won him universal applause and gladdened all
the island’s echoes’.

It was not always easy to elude this tyrant, constantly greedy for
fresh gifts. If Eyraud shut his door Torometi calmly sat down be-
side the hut, where he was soon joined by his wife, his neighbours
and the passers-by. A terrible din broke out; stones were thrown at
the walls, and Eyraud, not without reason, judged it prudent to
give up the object coveted by Torometi, rather than have his hut
demolished or ‘wait until they set fire to it’.

One day Torometi suggested to Eyraud that he should tour the
island and visit his pra scattered in the various bays. No sooner
had Eyraud left Hanga-roa than he received warning that his dwel-
ling was being looted. He returned home as fast as he could and
met Torometi, who told him, in the most natural way in the world,
that if his window had been smashed and some of his belongings
had vanished, it was the fault of—the wind. Eyraud was really the
Rio, the servant, of the matato‘a Torometi. If he tried to plant veget-
ables, they were stolen. If he wanted to make bricks, Torometi
whisked away the straw to heat his own stones.

The festival of the bird-man took place in September. Torometi’s
tribe was threatened by jealous rivals and Torometi, knowing he
was incapable of resisting the other matato‘a, decided to quit Hanga-
roa. But he did not want thereby to lose his ‘servant’ or his riches.
He ordered Eyraud to accompany him on his retreat. The latter
refused to submit to this final humiliation. To make sure that he
would at least not lose his ‘protégé’s” possessions, Torometi broke
into his hut and plundered it. This was the first time Torometi had
used brute force. Eyraud, at the end of his tether, resolved to flee.
A few natives an a = Torometi and his followers set
out in it, and after a long and acrimonious argument
Byraud to the ground, seized him by the arms Lee pei

--- PAGE 60 ---
THE TRAGIC STORY OF EASTER ISLAND 53

dragged him along until, after being almost torn apart, he promised
to come with them. Shortly afterwards, the threats that had hung
over Torometi materialized. A band of warriers gathered in front
of his hut, tore off the thatch, and set fire to it. Poor Eyraud passed
into the hands of the conquerors.

The humiliated Torometi prepared to seck refuge with some
south-coast tribes linked to him by ties of blood. The conquerors
would have liked to keep Eyraud; but the latter, moved by feelings
hard to understand, chose to follow the man he depicts to us as his
tormentor. He had taken only a few steps when, ustled from all
sides and dazed by the uproar, he felt his hat being whipped off his
head. This was the signal for a general assault. In a minute, he had
been stripped of his overcoat and shoes, and his clothes had been
torn to shreds. A few seconds later, Eyraud was as naked as an
islander. A well-aimed stone put the finishing touch to his misery.
In the evening, Torometi forced him to return to his hut and fetch
the few objects that had not been stolen. Eyraud was lucky enou h
to find a worn-out pair of shoes and an old blanket, with which Re
covered himself. rhe saine night he fled to Vai-hu.

Eyraud then gave proof of great strength of character. Unaffected
by his destitution, he quietly continued his lessons in a cave by the
seashore. Eight days later he heard the karanga, the sound that
announces an important event. ‘Pahi, pahi—a boat.’ The news left
him almost unmoved. Many ships had sailed past the island, but
none of them had put in. The following day, however, a schooner
anchored before Hanga-roa, and Eyraud, with a shaggy beard and
wrapped in his blanket, went down to the beach after the natives,
who had forgotten their quarrels in the excitement. The schooner
carried two Fathers from Chile, who had come to enquire into the
fate of Brother Eyraud and to bring him succour.

The natives’ impatience reached a climax: they flung themselves
into the water and swam round the boat. A woman clambered
aboard, made the sign of the cross by way of greeting, and recited
the Credo. This gesture and this prayer seemed like a miracle to the
priests, who were none the less worried by the yelling crowd. They
asked after Brother Eyraud, but the slip tie was mis-
understood—gave rise to indignant denials: the islanders imagined
they were being asked whether they had slit their visitor’s throat. A

--- PAGE 61 ---
54 EASTER ISLAND

whale-boat was lowered and headed for the shore. Thereupon the
crowd offered the same spectacle that had greeted Kotzebue and
Beechey. The men yelled and danced about as though seized with
mass hysteria. But one thing had changed: in the middle of this
vociferous mob there was a white man who had lived on the island
for six months. The crew of the whale-boat signalled to the crowd
to come and help them land. Torometi, mistaking the sailors’ wish,
took Eyraud on his broad shoulders and carried him out to the
boat. The oarsmen, terrified by the behaviour of the natives, seized
Eyraud and rowed away as fast as they could. After relating his
adventures to those on board the ship, Eyraud demanded to be
taken back to land. The captain refused, and the schooner set sail
for Chile the same evening. Long before she weighed anchor, a

eat silence fell on Hanga-roa: the crowd—regretting the man they
fad tormented, or perhaps fearing vengeance on his part now that
he had gone to join his own people—had dispersed, leaving the
beach deserted. Only an abandoned little wooden hut marked the
dawn of a new era.

But Brother Eyraud had not deserted either his island or his task.
Seventeen months later he returned to Easter Island in the company
of Brother Hippolyte Roussel and seven Mangarevans. Nothing had
changed. But this time Eyraud had taken the precaution of bring-
ing with him a hut of corrugated iron. The treasures so much
coveted by the natives were placed in the shelter of these fire-proof
walls. The islanders laid siege to the little dwelling, and, in their
vexation at not being able to get in, pelted it with stones. The noise
made by the corrugated iron was a revelation to them. Immedi-
ately ‘the whole multitude of grown-up children surrounded the
cabin, dancing, shouting, drumming on the metal sheets, and every
now and then sending a hail of stones rattling on to the roof’.
Everything had to be hermetically sealed, and for two months the
missionaries were obliged to light their lamp in broad daylight to
read their breviary. Every time they went out they had to force
their way through a crowd ‘whose attitude left no doubt as to their
intentions and who were watching for the moment when they could
take us by surprise and strip us of our Possessions.” Practical jokes
were played on them; they often found it impossible to open the
lock of their door, which had been filled with gravel. But, in spite

--- PAGE 62 ---
THE TRAGIC STORY OF EASTER ISLAND 55

of everything, the Mission was put on its feet. Timber houses went
up near Hanga-roa beach, and orange, fig and mul trees
sprouted in the Mission garden. The natives grew accustomed to the
presence of these inoffensive and benevolent strangers and came in
ever-increasing numbers to learn the prayers and songs. On Sun-
days the church was full.

The succession of unpleasant incidents was not, however, entirely
at an end. One day, when Brother Eyraud was working at the
bottom of a well, a native demanded that he should immediately
surrender his trousers, if he did not want to be crushed in his hole.
Eyraud could not have escaped from this awkward predicament it
Brother Roussel had not providentially come to his rescue.

The chiefs were the only ones to offer any resistance to conver-
sion, and they did so for a reason that has greatly retarded the
gress of Christianity among peoples practising polygamy. They
were unwilling to separate from wives who had shared their lives
and to whom they were often very attached. In some instances they
feared they would be unable to maintain their position if they lost
the wives who assisted them in their functions and helped to keep
up their prestige. But they, too, finally gave in. The matato‘a of

lotu-iti received the missionaries with a solemnity that gives us
some idea of the refinement of etiquette governing the ald pagan

society.

Knowledge of the new doctrine spread rapidly. It had reached
the most distant creeks, and the moment had come to administer
the lustral water. As in the old days of barbarian Europe, baptism
fe _scomded to hundreds of catechumens gathered at the foot of

ic altar.

The last heathens were received into the bosom of the Church on
August 14, 1868, the eve of the Assumption. Brother Eyraud, the
humble mechanic who had become a ‘worker for the Gospel’, died
a few days later. His last words were, ‘Are they all baptized?’
“All,” came the reply. Then, like a good workman who had finished
his task, he fell a to rest for ever in the sands of this beach on
which he had been the first E to live and die.

missionary, who breaks the natives’ resistance and ur,
them to submission by promises of future bliss, is invariably fol-
lowed by that other representative of European civilization—the

--- PAGE 63 ---
56 EASTER ISLAND

trader. A French adventurer, Dutroux-Bornier, settled on the
island with the missionaries’ permission. The portrait the mission-
aries draw of him, and the memory he has left behind on the island,
are not very prepossessing. He seems to have been violent, graspin
and unscrupulous. But at the same time he was enterprising
ambitious. He bought land for a few pieces of cotton cloth, enlarg-
ing his property by force, and finally laid the foundations of a pros-
‘ous agricultural undertaking at Mataveri. He was surrounded

y a native bodyguard commanded by Torometi, who was cager to
take revenge on those who had once driven him out of Hanga-roa.
He dreamed continually of becoming a great chief and having for
his slaves ‘the vanquished people of Hanga-roa and Vai-hu’.

The natives associated with Bornicr and Torometi made raids on
Hanga-roa. Huts were burnt, shots exchanged, and, dominating the
tumult, a small cannon set up at Mataveri fired a few balls, the
detonation of which has not yet been forgotten by the modern
population. People were wounded and even killed. A bullet
whistled very are to Brother oe an ane missionaries,
exasperated ese outrages, complained to venturer’s part-
ner—Mr de of Tahite—awho bine to Easter Island to coe
gate the position and saw nothing but burnt-out wreckage. He fled
in terror without making up his mind what to do. From that
moment on, the situation Bere so impossible for the missionaries
and their flock that the Bishop of Tahiti ordered the evacuation of
the island. Not all the natives, however, followed their pastor to the
Gambiers. Three hundred allowed themselves to be enticed by
Brander and were transported to Tahiti, where their descendants

late one of the districts of the town of Papeete, They have not
orgotten their origins, and even today they exchange letters at
long intervals with their relatives who stayed on Easter. In 1935 we
acted as voluntary intermediaries between some of these families
that had been separated for sixty-five years.

The whole island would have been evacuated by its inhabitants
if Bornier, afraid of finding himself without labourers, had not seen
to it that a hundred and cleven natives were left behind. The

ain put them ashore before weighing anchor, “despite their

The four hundred and fifty natives we found on Easter Island

--- PAGE 64 ---
THE TRAGIC STORY OF EASTER ISLAND 57

in 1934 were the descendants of this handful of islanders who had
been compelled to remain against their will. Dutroux-Bornicr was
destined to suffer for his brutalities. Acts of violence and the rape of
women had caused him to be bitterly hated by the natives who sur-
rounded him. One day, after he had committed a fresh exccss, he
was murdered, Two or three days later a French ship anchored off
the island. ‘The facts did not come to light and the visitors went
away firmly convinced that Bornier had died by falling from his
horse. His wife, Koreto, passed herself off as queen of the island
and impressed the guests by her haughty air and evident desire to
imitate European Whe

Mr Brander installed as the new manager a half-caste named
Salmon, who was related on his mother's side to the Tahitian royal
family. Salmon lived nearly twenty years on the island, with a team
of Tahitians who contributed greatly to changes in local traditions
and even introduced a number of Tahitian expressions into the
Easter language. The natives took to this Tahitian who understood
and did nor ill-treat them. The island was subsequently annexed by
Chile and leased to the British firm of Williamson, Balfour & Co.
The little Polynesian aa poe was no more than a vast farm
administered by breeders of Scottish sheep, without much imagina-
tion, and by nondescript Chilean officers exiled for one reason or
another to this tiny colony. The Easter Islanders of today wear
European clothes and have done their best to forget the past. But
they have retained their language and a few elements of their former
culture, and they continue to fish and cultivate the soil in the ancient
manner. A few ald people can still recall stories and legends of the
pagan cra, and the children can still croon traditional little rhyth-
mical tunes as they play cat’s cradle with a piece of string. A few
matrimonial and funerary customs have been preserved in a more
or less modified form, and in the evening the islanders still fear the
return of the akuake or spirits of the dead. Wooden sculpture, the
glory of Easter art, still thrives, but its products arc heart-breakingl
vulgar. They are bazaar ‘curios’, horrors typical of their kind. Such
poverty reigns on the island that itis impossible to speak of a transi-
tion from the primitive condition to Western civilization. Easter
Island, neglected by the Chilean Government and disastrously in-
fluenced by the people who found their way to it, has not fallen into

--- PAGE 65 ---
58 EASTER ISLAND

decline—it has simply rotted in the midst of a poverty from which
there is no way out.

Easter Island hit the headlines for a brief instant in the course of
the present century. In 1914, von Spee’s fleet put in there before
meeting its tragic fate. No one on the island had heard about the
declaration of war; Williamson, Balfour & Co’s British manager
stocked up the German ships with sheep and demanded a cheque
instead oe the gold he had been offered in payment. The ‘Prinz
Friedrich Eitel’ sailed into Easter waters and sank the French
cargo-boat ‘Jean’, whose crew remained on the island.

It was at Easter Island that the war on merchant shipping con-
ducted by the crew of the ‘See Adler’, commanded by von Liickner,
came to an end in 1918. A few of the officers and men, who had
been wrecked on an atoll in the Society Islands, managed to capture
a French schooner. They sailed it to Easter Island, where it went to
the bottom under mysterious circumstances. The rumour is still
current that it was scuttled by the sailors, who were tired of adven-
ture. The officers were lodged at Mataveri and led a peaceful exist-
ence for several months, until one day they sighted a sail on the
horizon and tried to seize the vessel, in the manner of filibusters;
but it turned out to be a Chilean ship and, giving up their plan,
they allowed it to take them to Valparaiso.

It seemed as though the world was determined to communicate
its turmoil to this little patch of land which, more than any other,
deserved peace and oblivion. The economic crisis that descended on
Chile around 1928 caused a period of revolutions. Some politicians
implicated in a coup d'état were deported to Hanga-roa. They
brought with them a spirit of agitation that was disastrous to public
peace. Violent quarrels broke out between soldiers and sailors in
which the natives took sides, splitting into factions as in the days
of the matato‘a.

During this turbulent period the island witnessed another event
that found an echo in the world press. We heard the story from the
hero himself. A group of opposition politicians (including President
Alessandri’s son) had | been exiled to Easter Island under the super-
ras of Sefior Cumprido, who was appointed Governor of the
island.

After a few months a schooner, which the exiles’ friends had

--- PAGE 66 ---
THE TRAGIC STORY OF EASTER ISLAND 59

chartered to rescue them, put in at the island. Sefior Cumprido had
enough police to put up a resistance, but knowing the instability of
political passions he speculated on the future and, not content with
releasing his captives, he departed in their company. Sefior Cum-
prido proved to have backed the right horse, and he had no cause
to regret his decision.

In 1934, the year of our visit, Easter Island was undoubtedly the
most unhappy of all the Pacific colonies. All the other Polynesians
had hss themselves to modern life, and a kind of status quo
has been established between them and their conquerors. Easter
Island had been left to its own resources and received no other aid
than that given by the Company’s agents to its employees. In Chile
the name of Easter Island merely revived sordid quarrels.

The Franco—Belgian Mission served to draw the Chilean Govern-
ment’s attention to the fate of the islanders. Some progress has been
made in the course of the intervening twenty years. A missionary,
Father Sebastian Englert, has made his home there and has used
the leisure left to him by his ministry to collect texts of great interest
to ethnography and folklore. A dispensary has been built at Hanga-
roa, and one of the attendants named Pakomio gave us a good deal
of useful information. A school has been opened by nuns and
almost all the children are learning to read and write. The Chilean
Government has conceded fresh tracts of land to the natives—a step
rendered essential by the continual increase in the island’s popula-
tion. This rose from 456 in 1935 to 721 in 1947, and the increase is
bound to go on, since forty-nine per cent of the natives, nine years
ago, were under fifteen. Isolated and neglected as it is, Easter Island
is none the less sharing in the great demographic upthrust that has
developed during the present century in most of the Polynesian
islands, Peoples that seemed on the point of dying out have reacted
against their decline and begun to multiply again.

A medical report published in 1951 gives a favourable picture of
the island’s state of health. Tuberculosis is almost non-existent and,
contrary to widespread belief, no venereal disease has been observed
on the island. The only endemic disease is leprosy, said to have
been introduced in 1889 by three natives repatriated from Tahiti.
There are fifty-one lepers, and today—thanks to the efforts of the
Society of Friends of Easter Island—they are housed in a leper

--- PAGE 67 ---
60 EASTER ISLAND

settlement that is more comfortable than the filthy hovel to which
they were confined at the time of our visit.

ne native I met at Valparaiso told me that the young men were
extremely keen to come to Chile to live and learn a trade. As they
were forbidden by law to leave the island, a certain number stowed
away on every vessel that called, in the hope of reaching the con-
tinent. Easter Island, then, is undergoing a process of moderniza-
tion. The transformation is not to be regretted. It will destroy
nothing that was not already in ruins, for Easter Island civilization
died between 1862 and 1870. After this date the island asked
nothing more of us but the fulfilment of a simple human duty: that
the persons and dignity of the descendants of the Polyncsians who
carved the great statues and engraved the tablets should be respected
by their new masters.

--- PAGE 68 ---
CHAPTER IV

How the Easter Islanders Lived

The problem of water—Domestic animals—Fishing—Cooking—
Dwellings—Dress and personal adornment
Easter Istanp has too often been pictured in os pate light,
A bare island, a field of volcanic stones, an unp uctive tract of
land incapable of supporting a population of any density—such are
the expressions most commonly used to describe it. By what strange
freak did a brilliant civilization manage to develop on this sup-
y barren rock? Is the transport of the greatest statues conceiv-
Able without the trees required for the construction of skids or
rollers? On what did the ‘armies of slaves’ live who hauled these
statues over the fields of lava and along the volcanic crests?

If this picture of Easter Island as a barren rock conformed to the
facts there would be only two solutions to the mystery: either this
scrap of land is really the vestige of a vanished continent, as some
claim, or else the island’s flora was destroyed and the cultural level
of its people drastically reduced by some cataclysm.

In reality, however, Easter Island’s arid appearance is deceptive.
Roggeveen considered it so fertile that he dubbed it an ‘earthly

ise’. M, de La Pérouse’s gardener was delighted with the
‘nature of the soil and declared that three days’ work a year would
be enough to support the population.

This latter comment was entirely unwarranted, af course; but it
is none the less truc that a modern botanist has spoken highly of the
richness of Easter Island’s volcanic soil. Descriptions left by the first
visitors to the island often speak warmly of the natives’ gardens.
Their horticultural produce seemed to these voyagers not only
varied, bur of excellent quality.

Then as now, the boty of the volcanoes were meadows;
along the shore one id see a succession of gardens and banana

tations. Trees alone were lacking from this smiling landscape.
inhabited areas were dotted with stunted shrubs, whose low,
twisted branches could not have been much use to the islanders.

ce 61

--- PAGE 69 ---
62 EASTER ISLAND

Roggeveen, Gonzalez, Cook and La Pérouse were intrigued by this
absence of large trees which, in their view, should have hampered
the development of a culture whose savage grandeur they admired
in other respects. When the first Polynesian colonists landed on the
island they no doubt found there a kind of natural park, abounding
in groves of foro-miro (Sopkora toromiro). For centuries this dwart
shrub provided them with the wood from which they carved their
famous statucttes and their ceremonial objects. It disappeared from
the island during the second half of last century, destroyed by sheep
and goats, with the exception of a single specimen that survived in
an inaccessible spot—the interior of the Rano-kao volcano. During
our stay the natives were jealously watching the growth of this tree,
waiting for the right moment to cut it down and turn it into
statuettes and other ‘curios’.

nd has it that the island’s trees—the hau (Triumfeta semi-
triloba), the marikuru (Sapindus saponaria), the makoi (Thespesia
geeeiees) and the sandalwood tree—were introduced by erp.

otu-matu'a when he emigrated from his mysterious homeland

Marac-renga. There is nothing improbable about this tradition; for
when the Polynesians migrated they provided themselves with the
seeds or plants of useful trees, especially of the mulberry, whose
bark supplied them with apa cloth. Some of the species enumer-
ated above, however, arrived before Man. They were carried to the
island either by the wind, or by birds, or by other agents as yet
unidentified that were instrumental in spreading the flora of the
Pacific. There can be no doubt that Hotu-matu‘a and his followers
had on board coconuts and seedlings of the breadfruit tree; but
when ig nae them on Easter Island they must have suffered
the bitter disappointment of seeing these two trees, whose fruits
were a staple article of dict in their home country, perish in this
colder climate. Today the only coconut palms growing in this
Ultima Thule of Polynesia are two that were introd recently
and have become sterile.

The ancient Easter Islanders apparently preserved the memor:
af the coconut (nix) on which their pia had fed, for it eae
among the fruits and plants whose origin is celebrated in a creation
chant. The line in question runs: Aésa-metua ki ai kiroto hia Riri-
tuna-rai, ka pu te niu (*Parent-God by copulating with Angry-Eel

--- PAGE 70 ---
HOW THE EASTER [ISLANDERS LIVED 63

produced the coconut’). It would be unintelligible to anyone who
did not associate it with the old Polynesian myth that the coconut
palm issued from the head of an eel buried in the ground by a god.
‘The modern natives give the name nis to the seeds of the makor
(Thespesia populnea), which do indeed look like small coconuts.

Little lave be obtained from the shrubs growing on Easter
Island but statuettes, spears and adze hafts. Fortunately for the
natives, the ocean currents often brought them pieces of driftwood.
These were treasures of inestimable valuc, which they attributed to
the favour of some ancestor, A dying father frequently promised to
send his children a tree from the kingdom of shades.

The Easter climate, so unpropitious to coconut palms and bread-
fruit trees, was more favourable to the taros, sweet potatoes, yams,
bananas, sugar-cane, fi (Cordyline fruticosa) and turmeric (Curcuma
longa) brought by the first colonists, These plants flourished and
allowed the population to increase. Although each of them is

ted on Easter by only a single species, the islanders dis-
tinguish a strikingly large number of varietics and forms which
they know by different names. This aimlessly minute classification
is based on insignificant details, such as a patch of colour on the
leaves, the peculiar colour of certain tubers or of the fruit, or some
anomaly in the growth. Such refinements of nomenclature are
proof of great familiarity with plants and indicate a long agricul-
tural tradition. They are also an expression of that spirit of observa-
tion and analysis which so-called primitive people often bring to
their vision of nature.

About half a mile from the Te Peu aAw, the crust of the basalt is
cracked like a loaf of brown bread the baker has allowed to rise too
much. Beneath this lava skin gape immense cavities that are toda
filled with luxuriant vegetation. A drop of a few yards is enou:
to take one down from a blackened and rocky plain into a tangle
of verdure that emits an odour of rotting vegetation and sap re-
miniscent of a greenhouse. In these sunken gardens the natives, as
in days gone by, grow bananas and other plants that cannot with-
stand the cold blast of the sea winds.

Easter Island has been cultivated and inhabited across almost the
whole of its length and breadth, with the exception of the Poike
headland and a few areas in the interior,

--- PAGE 71 ---
64 EASTER ISLAND

Once it could easily have fed four or five thousand inhabitants,
since the 720-odd natives that make up its present population are
able to live in comfort in a district covering about six acres round
the village of Hanga-roa.

The soil of Easter Island is, therefore, fertile; but in extolling its
richness we tend to neglect the island farmer’s labour. His task was
a hard one. He had to clear his fields of stones, raise a little heap of
earth for every potato or taro he planted, and hold back the invad-
ing weeds. His agricultural implements were rudimentary: his hoe
consisted of a sharpened stake or, in default of this, a long, pointed
stone. There being neither a stream nor a river, he had to keep the
vegetable beds moist and prevent the sun from burning up the
crops. To this end the fields were covered with a thin carpet of
grass. Certain plants demanded special measures. Taros were made
to ‘suffer’, as de Easter term has it, by being planted among stones,
which protected their tubers from the sun and retained the mois-
ture. "These apparently unpromising sites helped the plants to grow
larger and better. Furrows drawn across the slopes 3 the volcanoes
temporarily held the rainwater.

Some plants, such as the paper mulberry, that were liable to be
Beaiorel by the wind, were grown either in natural or artificial
hollows of varying depths. In addition they were protected by low
walls of unmortared stone. These enclosures are numerous near old
dwellings. Vegetable waste accumulated through the ages has
finally formed a thick layer of extremely fertile humus. Hence, the
natives continue to use these enclosures for growing taros and the
tubers of 4 (Cordyline fruticosa), which thrive there with no
effort on the part of the cultivator. ,

“Body full of water,’ it is said, was a serious insult addressed, out
of jealousy, to those who prided themselves on the fine appearance
of their gardens. The implications of this expression are obscure,
but the old-time Easter Islanders nevertheless considered it a grave
taunt which they were ready to avenge in blood. The circumstances
under which it was used bear witness to a feeling that is also mani-
fested in other ways—love of the land. The frequent allusions in the
old travellers’ tales to the regular arrangement and meticulous tidi-
ness of the fields, and the symmetry of the furrows, leave no doubt
about this attachment to the soil. The banana plantations set out in

--- PAGE 72 ---
HOW THE EASTER ISLANDERS LIVED 65

quincunx (alternate rows of different spacing) scem to have been a
icularly pleasant sight. Work in the fields was not monotonous
drudgery. It provided an opportunity for joyful reunions of friends
and relatives, who came to offer their assistance to the head of the
family; and at the end of the day the latter regaled them with a
copious meal taken piping hot from the underground ovens. The
feast ended with songs and dancing. With the coming of the
Whites, the Easter Islanders lost this element of joy harmoniously
interwoven with the tasks imposed upon man by nature.

The future harvests were eiteen ean theft, and even from
the impatience or greed of their owners, by a tabu pronounced by
the king himself or by some priest of the royal line. Any violation
of the interdict brought sudden death or a disease that rendered the
transgressor an object of pity and horror. A little heap of stones or
a few branches arranged in a certain manner warned passers-by of

ger.

_ When the time came for harvesting, the tabu was lifted by the
same exalted per: who had imposed it, and the produce of
the fields was restored to the profane world once the first-fruits had
been offered to the gods.

Drinking water has always been a difficult problem for the natives.
Easter Island has no river, and the little ravines that furrow the
slopes of its hills are volcanic in origin: the rain quickly soaks into
the porous soil and forms under, ‘i witer bios hat fasiole
the sea at beach level. Thin trickles of water may be seen oozing
from the rocks at several points along the coast. Unfortunately,
these rivulets emer Pi duis eothe ang that thote waters teacriely
The ancestors of the modern natives sought to prevent salt water
from mingling with the fresh by constructing walls that formed a
kind of reservoir; salt water still seeped into the water that accumu-
lated at the foot of the walls, however. The Easter Islanders dis-
regarded the brackish nature of the water and quenched their thirst
at these beach pools, to the great surprise of the first mariners, who
imagined that, like the albatross, they were drinking brine. At low-
lying spots along the coast the natives also dug stone-lined wells,
which are now a or partially filled with mud.

The largest reserves of fresh water are the lakes at the bottom of

--- PAGE 73 ---
6 EASTER ISLAND

the craters; but they are difficult, and even dangerous, of access.
Today as in the past the natives only draw water from them under
the pressure of extreme necessity. There are a few on s of low
output, but perfectly pure, a certain distance from the shore and
¢ven at two points inland, In days gone by, these springs were the
centres of important hamlets (Puna-marengo and Via-tara-kai-ua,
for example), as the numerous traces of houses and ovens (umu, see
page 72) in their vicinity testify. Elsewhere, the natives had to be
content either with slightly brackish water, or with water that col-
lected in natural cavities or caught in calabashes or stone receptacles.
Square holes cut artificially in the rocks were—if the natives of our
own day are to be believed—little reservoirs that served in days
gone by to catch rainwater.

Pigs, dogs and chickens are the three domestic animals the Poly-
nesians took with them on their migrations. They did not always
succeed in bringing them safely to land. The first settlers on Easter
Island must have ye theirs at sea, for their descendants had no
other ic species than the chicken and were astonished and
frightened by the dogs and pigs shown them by the cightcenth-cen-
tury seafarers. Chickens constituted an important source of nourish-
ment for a population whose dict was essentially vegetable in origi
They seem to have been a symbol of wealth and the ou aed
instrument of exchange in the system of reciprocal obligations
ritual gifts that characterized ancient Easter Island society. The
chickens were shut up by their owners every night in niches con-
structed in platforms of unmortared stones, where they were safe
from theft. To get at them a thief would have to shift the stones,
and the resulting noise would inevitably have raised the alarm. Last
century, when the majority of the villages were abandoned, some
chickens reverted to a wild state and settled at the bottom of the
craters, which still echo with their cackling.

The rat is not a domestic animal, but, like the fowls, it was
introduced into Easter Island by its first colonists, to whom it was a
rodents display a few le knew in the They
are rather asha of it, and ne ‘rateaters’, ithe ¢ that of
‘cannibals’, calls to mind the barbarous age from which they flatter

--- PAGE 74 ---
HOW THE EASTER ISLANDERS LIVED 67

themselves they have escaped. The black rats that invaded the
island at the same time as Hotu-matu’a and his followers have now
given way to the grey rats that arrived with the European vessels.
This breed has overrun the island, where it wages war on the
chickens and devours foodstuffs. The innumerable walls of un-
mortared stones provide them with nests, and they carry i
effrontery to the point of showing themselves in broad daylight,

The waters round the island abound in fish, especially the waters
round the rocks of Motu-nui which, for this reason, are frequented
by thousands of sea birds. The present gencration of natives take
little advantage of this abundance, preferring their eternal diet of
mutton to fish. We had very few opportunities of eating fish during
our stay on the island, but it is true that it was winter, a scason not
considered good for fishing. In ancient times fish were the object of
a tabu during all the months of the southern winter. Tunny fishing
still enjoys some favour and is practised in the open sca during
summer. It is the speciality of a few individuals who possess two
boats in common. The rest of the population rely on their generosity
» a reciprocal obligations that compel the fishermen to distribute
ca

Although today fishing occupics only a secondary position in the
island's economy, such was not the case in the past. This is nit
hy the number of stories and legends with fishermen as their
the multitude of fish-hooks to be found in the caves, and the fre-
quency with which representations of fish and other marine species
occur among the petroglyphs collected by our mission. Important as
fishing was for the Easter Islanders, it was never as vital to them as
to the Tahitians or Marquesans, Easter Island is not, like man
other Polynesian islands, encircled by a coral reef that attracts
and makes them easier to catch. By limiting the number of canoes
at their disposal, the lack of timber forcibly reduced the fishermen’s
scope. For the most part they confined themselves to catching fish
from the top of the reefs or within a short distance of the coast.
Large fish were caught with stone hooks, several of which came
into our possession intact, In elegance of shape and perfection of
polishing they are masterpieces of Neolithic art. The discovery of
several unfinished specimens enabled us to reconstruct the different

--- PAGE 75 ---
68 EASTER ISLAND

phases in their manufacture. A pebble was sought whose natural
shape suggested the hook-to-be. It was then submitted to prolonged
and meticulous polishing until it had attained its final outline. To
hollow out the centre, a large hole was drilled and constantly en-
larged, until nothing was left but the hook itself and the shank. The
latter part of the operation was the most delicate, and it could hap-
pen that at this stage the stone broke, wasting weeks of effort. The
number of broken fish-hooks we recovered near former villages
proved that such accidents were not infrequent.

The big fish allowed themselves to be caught with stone hooks,
but the small fry, and even the medium-sized species, would only
bite more delicate fish-hooks.

According to legend, the first inhabitants of the island used none
but stone hooks, with which they only caught tunny. The other
fish swam round the bait without touching it. Catches were few and
the fishermen could not understand their ill-fortune. A hero with
visionary gifts, Ure, had a dream. His soul entered a hut at Tira-
koka, where it saw a bone hook hanging on a wall. The soul re-
turned into the body it had temporarily left, and when Ure awoke
in the morning he went in search of human bones, of which he
made a fish-hook. During the day he joined the fishermen, who
had been casting their stone hooks in vain since dawn. Ure’s success
was immediate. He drew in a fish at every cast; the other fishermen
—surprised and jealous—tried to worm his secret out of him with
questions. “How do you do it?” they asked. ‘What bait do you
use?’ Ure replied modestly: ‘I fish just like you, with a hook of
stone.”

In the end his companions, suspecting some trick, seized him and
discovered his bone hook. Angered by his lies, they beat him
severely and left him in his canoe bleeding profusely.

In this small Polynesian world, where the dead became gods and
every outrage inflicted on their remains was inflicted on the whole
group, this manner of using bones represented the most odious
humiliation. The half-sawn fragments of femur or humerus that
are found in the caves enable us to glimpse a background of bloody
wars, yengeance and profanation. The fish-hook carved from an
enemy’s bone participated in his mana, that is, in his mystic power.
The warrior who used it could imagine that his victim Vo become

--- PAGE 76 ---
HOW THE EASTER ISLANDERS LIVED 69

his slave and was helping him to obtain food, thus increasing his
strength. The power emanating from the hook was supposed to
attract the fish and create a supernatural association bétween the
food and the dead man. For a cannibal Polynesian, no insult was
greater than to refer to a man as being ‘food ’—this was to defile his
mana and reduce him to the level of an animal: to eat a fish caught
with a hook made of human bone was tantamount to eating the
owner of the bone himself.

The tunny fishers used as bait little fish called ature, which they
crushed between two stones. The pulverized flesh was attached to
a stone that acted as a sinker. When the hook had reached the
desired depth the fisherman released the bait and the stone with a
jerk. Attracted by the flesh, the tunny swam around the hook and
eventually took it. Sometimes the fisherman would use two hooks
at the same time, a small one baited with crushed ature flesh and a
larger one baited with a whole ature. One line was attached to his
belt, the other to a transverse stick in the canoe by a knot that the
fish undid when it tugged at the line. The fisherman let it swim
out to sea before drawing it in.

There were also a wide variety of nets, from little spoon-nets to

eat draw-nets 100 to 130 feet long. Each type and size was used

‘or catching a particular species of fish. The ature were caught in
huge bag-nets into which they were lured by crustaceans attached
to the opening.

Analysis of an ancient draw-net preserved in the Washington
National Museum has shown that the meshes were made of fibres
of the paper mulberry. This detail is important, for it tells us what
the ropes used to haul the great statues were made of.

Net-fishing has lost much of its importance. The collaboration of
a great number of individuals was required to manage the large
draw-nets, and modern Easter Island society is broken into too
many small units for the team spirit to have been preserved. This is
one of the reasons why individual fishing has superseded the collec-
tive undertakings of the past. The modern islanders catch the cray-
fish that are common round the island, either during the day by
diving along the reefs or at night by torchlight.

Women and girls made daily visits to the beaches and the foot of
the cliffs to gather sea-urchins, crabs, shellfish and seaslugs. They

ct ‘

--- PAGE 77 ---
jo EASTER ISLAND

also ventured out at night, when the fish were sleeping in the rock-
pools, to catch them with pointed sticks. This shore fishing was the
special prerogative of the women, and most of the adventures that
befell women and are related in stories and legends happened to
them when they left their houses to go out on the reefs.

Turtles have become rare, but they are depicted in several petro-
glyphs and frequently mentioned in legends. We discovered in a
cave turtle-shell ornaments that confirmed what we had been told
about them. When turtles were sighted offshore the islanders pur-
sued them in their canoes; when they caught up with them they
dived down behind them and drove them into a net with a strong

Fig. 1. Easter Island canoe with outrigger: after an original sketch
by Blondela, 1780. Archives du Mintstére de la Marine, Paris.

mesh. The Easter Islanders prized turtles so highly that certain
structures of unmortared stone—known as tupa—standing on the
seashore are said to have been look-out towers on which watchmen
were posted day and night. The rooms adjoining these towers are
believed to have been the watchmen’s dwellings.
The ancient Easter Islanders’ boats were constructed on the same
model as those of other Polynesians, but because of the scarcity of
- timber they were neither as large nor as strong. They were make of
small planks ‘sewn’ together at the expense of much effort and
much patience. Stability was provided by an outrigger of a type
rare in Polynesia, but also found in the Marquesas. The float was
attached to two slender booms fastened to the flat gunwale of the
canoe. The prow and the poop, shaped like a duck’s bill, rose above
the water in the manner of the Eastern Polynesian craft (Fig. 1).

--- PAGE 78 ---
HOW THE EASTER ISLANDERS LIVED 7t

These boats carried not more than two or three people. The paddles
were of the most unusual type: they consisted of a heavy blade with
a high median flange attached to a handle. At the time of Brother
Eyraud’s arrival in the island, the natives had not entirely forgotten
the long canoes in which their ancestors crossed the sea. In 1860,
their contacts with Europeans had re-awakened their enthusiasm
for navigation; they wanted to be able to put out on the waves with-
out fear of capsizing and without having constantly to bale out
their little craft. They therefore insisted that their missionary should
immediately build them a great bark. Eyraud offered as excuse the
lack of timber. ‘Timber! ’ cried the natives, ‘we've got more timber
than we need.’ Making off in all directions, they came back and laid
at the feet of the unwilling shipwright every piece of timber—
straight, warped or rotten—they could lay their hands on. ‘At the
end of a fortnight,’ writes Eyraud, ‘the savages could see something
resembling a boat made of a hundred pieces of wood. I had only
one fear,’ he adds: ‘that I might be chosen to command this new
and dangerous vessel.’

Recalling that the boats which had occasionally put in at the
island were manned by crews wearing shirts and trousers, the
islanders thought of dressing in uniforms. Eyraud had of course,
to supply the costumes, and this provided a fresh opportunity of
phuidetog him. Here is his own account of the launching of this
national ship:

‘The vessel was dragged roughly across the stones and quickly
reached the water’s edge. This was the crucial moment. Everyone
wanted to lend a hand and contribute to the long-awaited opera-
tion. But alas . . . as the ship entered the sea, the sea entered the
ship . . Farewell pleasure trips, excursions and expeditions of all
kinds . . The national canoe had sunk.’

The five or six canoes which the natives of Hanga-roa possessed
in the eighteenth century enabled them to reach certain areas of the
sea that they identified with the aid of landmarks on shore. One of
the latter was the stone statue of Pou-haka-nononga, which the
“Mercator’ took with her at the end of our stay on the island and
which now graces one of the rooms of the Musée Royal du Cin-

tenaire at Brussels. A magical link existed between this statue

quan
and the shoals of tunny to which it guided the fishermen; this led -

--- PAGE 79 ---
72 EASTER ISLAND

one of our informants to say that the statue was the ‘divinity of the
tunny fish’.

The shortage of wood raised the problem of fire. Investigators won-
dered where the natives obtained the fuel needed to cook their food.
Like their modern descendants, the ancient Easter Islanders burnt
brushwood, sugar-cane stems, the dried trunks of banana and
dry potato leaves. Formerly they produced fire by the classic method
of Cccania—by moving a stick to and fro along a groove in a piece
of soft wood. After a minute or two, the shavings accumulated at
the end of the groove began to smoke and then glow. All that was
required then was to dd some easily inflammable substance to it.

Food was cooked Polynesian fashion in an smu, that is to say, a
pit with a fire at the bottom. Stones were heated in this pit and
taken out as soon as they had reached a high temperature. The
bottom of the pit was then lined with banana leaves on which the
food was placed in layers one above the other and covered first with
hot stones, then with leaves and finally with earth. A few hours
later, the food was dug up. It was cooked to perfection without the
slightest loss of juice. These ancient ovens, which are very numer-
ous in the vicinity of archaeological sites, are lined with four or five
slabs of stone that prevent the contents from coming into direct
contact with the earth,

Contemporary Easter story-tellers delight in introducing into the
legends of their island a detailed enumeration of the dishes that con-
stituted a traditional ovenful. In addition to yams, taros and pota-
toes, these lists—which have become a positive eitmosif of folklore
mention chickens, eels, spiny lobsters and various species of fish.
These were, of course, banquets or meals which a hero—following
the custom of the islanders themselves—offered to someone who
had promised his aid, both to show his gratitude and to bind his
pachabepoend the magic of the gift. The diet of the ancient Easter
slanders seems to have been very well balanced and not to have
been lacking in any clement essential to health. True, it is difficult
at this stage to determine the Proportion of each foodstuff in the
daily menu. Then as now, sweet potatoes were the staple food.
Brother Eyraud complains in one of his letters of having to cat them
all day long. An Easter Islander who wished to give me an idea of

--- PAGE 80 ---
HOW THE EASTER ISLANDERS LIVED 73

the monotony of life on his island once said to me: ‘Here, we are
born, we eat sweet potatoes, then more swect potatocs, and then we
die.’ However, it must not be forgotten that peoples condemned to
cat the same article of food all the time eventually develop a refine-
ment of taste that enables them, for example, to prefer one varicty
of tuber to another, where our surfcited palates can detect no
difference.

The savour of food cooked in underground ovens has been too
often extolled by voyagers, and even by tourists, to require fresh
praise. Nace Easter Giitrig 9 like that of many Polynesians,
is marked by the absence of salt. The natives absorb the salt intake
necessary to the organism from the sea air they breathe and the sea-
weed they cat raw, not to mention the sea water they drink when
swallowing the flesh of the molluscs which they pull off the rocks
on the shore.

We owe to Father Zumbohm, one of the first missionaries on the
island, a description of a banquet served according to ancient cus-
tom. He had been invited by one of the great chiefs of Hotu-iti,
who, despite his hostility towards Christianity, did not want to lose
face by a display less ostentatious than that put on by his rivals.

A few days before, the host had sent one party of his men fishi
and others to the fields to fetch potatoes, bananas, sugar-canes
chickens. He had had a large oven dug, which was lit on the morn-
ing of the day the feast was to take place. Etiquette demanded that
the guests should take their places on stones round the oven; and
they had to conform, in spite of their desire to rest in the shade.
Sista ta diame oe a ae , and when they

in
hurried to the trench, removed the earth and grass covering the

--- PAGE 81 ---
74 EASTER ISLAND

bestial appetite they displayed doubtless provided an amusing spec-
tacle oe ee paar ee iicks, and to a x them the Sahin cei
gerated their voracity.
During the course of this feast, one of the chiefs present com-
lained that he had not received the full respect duc by etiquette to
is rank, which had been under-estimated. His followers supported
him, and the argument degenerated into a violent brawl. Calm was
finally re-established and the incident resulted only in the loss of a
few potatoes. The meal was followed by games and dances,
watched by the guests softly cushioned on the grass in the shade of
2 rock.

Neither women nor children were admitted to this revelry, If
any choice dish—such as fish or chicken—was served, nothing was
Icke for them but the scraps,

Before the missionaries gathered the Easter Islanders together at
Hangz-roa, there was no village properly so-called on the island.
‘The natives lived in isolated huts or tiny hamlets. The ground-plan
of the ancient huts is still traced in the earth by the line of stones
that formed the foundations. These are wrought basalt curbs, all
the same size, set on edge in an oval or ellipse. Sticks and stems of
4 (Cordyline fruticosa) inserted in holes in the upper edge of these
curbstones constituted both the uprights and the rafters, were
fastened to a thin ridge-pole and as each one crossed the cor

ing upright on the rene: side they formed a series of arches, de-
creasing in height the centre towards the two ends. This
fragile frame was covered with mats and bundles of reeds ca:
overlai . These dwellings bore a certain resemblance to an over-
et t with an upward pointing keel. In front of the door,
which opened in onc of the long sides, lay a few slabs of stone sup-
porting a small porch or vestibule. Statues of wood or stone some-
bce tanked the threshold. The porch was so low that it could
only be entered on all fours, The furniture consisted solcly of reed
mats, stone pillows and calabashes containing all the family
treasures. These huts were generally empty during the day, but
everybody crowded in at night to sleep. The atmosphere quickly
became stifling and sleep was constantly interrupted by children
crying and the coming and going of the occupants.

--- PAGE 82 ---
HOW THE EASTER ISLANDERS LIVED 75

As the inhabitants liked to spend their leisure in front of their
huts, the entrance and the immediate precincts were often paved
with large rounded pebbles and occasionally decorated with small
pieces of coral.

On the average, the huts were thirty to fifty feet long and fave to
seven feet across, but some were much larger. The hut visited and
described by La Pérouse’s expedition was more than 300 feet long
by thirty feet wide, and housed two hundred people. We discovered
the foundations of a dwelling whose major axis measured about
120 feet.

The fragility and rusticity of these habitations seemed to us out
of keeping with the imposing masses of the mausoleums and
statues. The natives could have made up for the lack of wood by
using stone, as was done at Orongo. This contrast is due to ideas of
comfort that differ from ours, and also to traditional habits going
back to the time when the Easter Islanders’ ancestors lived on
islands with a richer flora. Unimpressive as they may appear, these
huts none the less bear witness to an ingenious adaptation to the
scanty resources of the environment.

_ Simple shelters erected beside the ovens did duty as kitchens.

Are the underground chambers that occur at various points on
the island close to the mausoleums to be regarded as permanent
habitations? Their original purpose is unknown to the modern
natives, who describe them as places of refuge in which women and
children shut themselves up in time of war. This interpretation
must be treated with reserve, to say the least of it: how could these
cellars with unconcealed entrances have afforded safe hiding-
places? The underground chamber behind the Vai-mata ahu is the
best preserved and finest in the island. Its location is marked by a
paved undulation of the ground, beside which opens a long tunnel
—lined with well-polished stone slabs, but extremely narrow—lead-
ing into a fair-sized chamber formed by a natural cavity extended
by walls of very carefully finished masonry. La Pérouse describes a
chamber of the same type that he visited near the Hanga-roa ahu.
M. Bernizet, who entered this vault, tells us that the natives used it
to store their provisions, their tools, their wood and, in fact, every-
thing they possessed.

The fact that many of the island’s numerous grottoes have been


--- PAGE 83 ---
76 EASTER ISLAND

converted into temporary or permanent habitations is evidenced by
the platforms constructed in their sides to serve as beds. Some of
these caverns are most impressive. The cave at Punamarengo, the
strangest of all, is one of the local curiosities. It opens in a mass of
reddish scoriae and communicates by various passages with several
subterranean chambers. The halls of this natural palace contained
skeletons, and as if the atmosphere were not already sufficiently
haunted, the air forced through the porosities by the waves fills the
chambers with cerie groans.

A few Easter Islanders live like cave-dwellers in crevices between
the rocks or beneath Apion, ledges, which they turn into nar-
row cells. Statues that have fallen on the inclined surfaces of the
mausoleums have become the roofs of shelters that have been
inhabited for varying periods.

The men used to wear nothing but a wide belt of beaten bark, one
end of which was passed between the legs and hung down over the
abdomen. To keep off the cold, or merely for the sake of el 2
they cast about their shoulders a rectangular cape stained with tur-
meric. The women wore a similar belt and sometimes a short skirt.
also liked to wrap themselves in a bark cloak.

hair of both men and wayne fell loose to their shoulders or
was knotted in a tuft on top of their heads. In a love a
tits vop-kxiot ts ctanipavea so: the fe: 08 4 fal We

Young girl, you are dying of love.

You are a crab living under Akurenga mausoleum,
You are a fish with a top-knot.

You make for the shore,

Little fish, O my friend!

Down there is seaweed

That is good to feed you.

There was little scope for personal vanity in clothes or hair-style;
this found expression in the tattooing that made some men’s bodies
real works of art. Loti and other travellers made drawings of the
patterns which the Easter Islanders tattooed on thcir persons. In the
variety and intricacy of its motifs and el Blea rp and ingeni-
ous arrangement, Easter Island tattooing falls little short artistically

--- PAGE 84 ---
HOW THE EASTER ISLANDERS LIVED 77

;>

e
we

Bast woe
Fig. 2. Images made of bulrushes covered with tapa cloth painted
2a 2 Patcae

so as to show patterns of body panting and tattooing.
Museum, Cambridge, Mass. 53543.

--- PAGE 85 ---
7B EASTER ISLAND

of that produced by the Marquesans and Maoris—the peoples who
have carried this art to the highest degree of perfection.

Easter tattooing is characterized by the important rle of areas of
geometric form spread over the face and other parts of the body.
Another of its peculiarities is the frequent use of naturalistic motifs,
representing birds, plants and implements. The native whose tattoo-
ing was copicd down by Stolpe bore on his arm picture of the
Orongo statue being carried off by the sailors of the ‘Topaze’.
Close perpendicular lines tattoocd on the thighs and lower legs gave
many natives the appearance of wearing stockings or breeches,

These works of art were produced by experts who supplied their
services to those who could afford to pay for them. An individual’s
rank and affluence were often indicated by the extent and beauty
of the patterns covering his body. The operation was slow and
carried out at intervals of several years, For tattooing to be perfect
when the subject reached adulthood, it had to be started carly—

enerally at the age of eight. The tattooist’s instrument was a little
fae take, which he tapped with a mallet to drive it into the cpider-
mis. The pigment was chatcoal made from i stems mixed with
poporo (Solanum nigrum) juice. These sessions were painful, and
some children—such as Viriamo, whose tattooing remained un-
finished—were unable to endure them. The chiet source of our
knowledge of Easter Island mune are two fapa images now in
the Peabody Museum, Harvard. They are covered with painted
drawings which reproduce with great care the most common tattoo
patterns (Fig. 2

The effects of tattooing were enhanced by painting the body with
red, white and grey earths, and especially with powder extracted
from the turmeric. The popularity of this latter root was due not
only to the orange pigment obtaincd from it, but also to its perfume.
The scent it emits is regarded by Polynesians as particalacty delect-
able, but Europeans arc insensible to it. In olden times the perfumed
emanations of the Rano-raraku turmeric attracted two spirit-women
who were living i te Aiva, in a foreign land, and who flew to Easter
Island to see these marvellous plants, The myth adds that it was
they who taught the islanders’ ancestors the delicate method by
which the famous pua powder is prepared.

Red and black were the favourite colours of the men. They

--- PAGE 86 ---
HOW THE EASTER ISLANDERS LIVED Pp

smeared their faces with alternate stripes in these two colours. Men
blackened from head to foot made a tremendous impression on the
first Europeans who saw them, as may be gathered honk Beechey's
account.

Easter Island might have been called the ‘Land of the Long-
Eared Men’. The natives described by the first voyagers had the
lobes of their ears widely perforated to make room for the inscrtion
of a heavy ornament made of shark’s vertebrac or wood. This prac-
tice was abandoned at the period when native culture vanished, and
the last old people with deformed ears died at the beginning of the
present century.

The finest ornaments were cock-feather diadems of various shapes
and colours, and especially reed helmets covered with feather
mosaic. The women wore strange wicker-work hats, wide and
Snares at the sides and with turned-up points at the back and

nt,

The old Easter Islanders had a passion for headgear and to satisty
it they risked the retaliation of the Europeans whose caps they stole.
This taste sometimes had comical results. Eyraud relates in one of
his letters that there was no object of which they would not make a
hat. A calabash, half a melon, the carcass of a bird—anything
would do. One native even proudly sct on his head two buckets one
inside the other. The most amusing case, however, was that of a
man who, having found a shoe, shod his head. These sartorial
extravagances came to an end after the period of assimilation.

The portrait of an old Easter Islander in gala dress is incom,
until the wooden ornaments with which he decorated himself have
been enumerated. If he was rich and noble he hung on his chest a
large crescent (rei-miro), whose carved horns represented bearded
men or cocks. Others attached to their shoulders sahonga, a sort of
wooden ‘heart’, which some writers have interpreted as stylized
coconuts, These objects for indicating wealth have never been seen

isplayed by a modern traveller. We know them from the accounts
of the living natives and the specimens that have found their way
into our museums.

Tepano took delight in enumerating these wooden treasures.
They are the subject of the same $ as are current regarding
the tablets. During our stay, more than one islander, inspired by a

--- PAGE 87 ---
80 EASTER ISLAND

dream, set out to look for caves full of rei-miro, tahonga and statu-
ettes, for dreams of wealth are still nourished by the memory of
these wooden adornments.

We have accompanied the ancient Easter Islander into the fields
and out to the sca; we have studied his dwelling and his costume. It
remains for us to get to know him in his creative activities.

The raw materials at his disposal were limited in number on an
island that was not rich in anything except volcanic rock. The
settlers to whom this meagre heritage fell must have known days of
worry and discouragement, when they found themselves deprived
of the majority of the plants upon which their basic crafts depended.
The poverty of the environment created problems which had
to solve, if they were not to impoverish their traditional culture and
deprive themselves of its most essential benefits,

following are a few of the difficulties by which they were
confronted. In the islands of Central or Eastern Polynesia, from
which they came, the ancestors of the ancient Easter Islanders had
woven their baskets and mats from the leaves of the pandanus or
coconut me On Easter Island they lacked not only these re-
sources, but any natural substitutes. They got out of the difficulty
with great ingenuity: bags and baskets were made from banana
leaves cut in strips and interwoven according to their basket-making
technique. These strands were not always suitable for the manu.
facture of the large mats which served them as beds and which
needed to cover their huts. They had recourse to the reeds that grew
at the bottom of the craters, but being unable to plait them they
sewed them together with thread.

The colonists succeeded in getting the paper mulberry (Brousson-
etia papyrifera) to grow on the island, and so were able to go on
making their cloth its bark. They preferred that of the young
stems, which they soaked in water after scraping its gnarled surface
with an obsidian knife. The strips of bark were then beaten with a
wooden mallet on big polished stones, Unlike the other Polynesians,
who joined the different pieces simply by beating them, the Easter
Islanders sewed them together with bone needles. In this Way they
produced cloths that were relatively thick and durable.

Nature favoured the Easter Islanders in one sphere only: it pro-

--- PAGE 88 ---
HOW THE EASTER ISLANDERS LIVED 81

vided an abundant supply of obsidian. Thanks to this volcanic
lass, the natives were able to manufacture extremely effective
ives, awls and weapons with a minimum of effort. The mataa or
javelin heads, which are to be found in hundreds above ground,
have the characteristic ace-of-spades shape with sharp, rounded
edges. ‘The unfinished or broken specimens that abound in the
vicinity of the Mount Orito quarry show the various stages in their
manufacture: a large flake of obsidian was detached from a slab of
the rough stone. The final shape was imparted by retouching with a
bone instrument, by means of which smaller flakes were split off by
skilfully directed pressure Cig. 3, page 101).

The value attached by Diper Wdaniers to the smallest scrap
of wood is reflected in their folklore and in certain incidents ob-
served by the first mariners. The swimmers who ventured aboard
Admiral Dupetit-Thouars’s ‘Vénus’ shouted loudly for planks;
fearing they might not be understood, they employed an extra-
ordinary dumb show, disdaining all other presents and even
refusing the food and drink offered them.

When our informant Tepano had nothing to do, he would fetch
his adze and start hacking a piece of wood that developed into some
monster, or simply a human figure with protruding ribs. His tools,
although he claimed to have ited them from a famous sculptor,
were of good polished steel. He refused to believe that his ancestors
could have carved wood with stone adzes, although he had picked
up large numbers of them. The Easter Islanders of today are per-
fectly willing to believe that the great tufa statues were produced
with the aid of stone axes and mallets, but the operation scems to
them impossible in the case of the wooden images. The products of
the modern natives show the effects of using iron tools and have
neither the finish nor the polish of the images laboriously cut out of
a toromiro trunk with a basalt adze.

We often watched these wooden images—the last survivals of
Easter Island art—come into being before our eyes. The sculptor’s
first act is to check the cutting edge of his adze; then, with regular
blows, he whittles away the wood until he has removed the super-
fluous parts and obtained the rough shape he i ge Reducing
the force of his blows, the artist now works with quick, i
touches until his creation has acquired its final form. Lastly, the

--- PAGE 89 ---
82 EASTER ISLAND

statue is given eyes: a ring of bone for the cornea and a tetrahedron
of obsidian for the pupil. The last stage consists in polishing the
carving and gettin; El, of the little facets with which it is covered.

In olden days, the carving of an image was an absorbing and
pleasant occupation that was intentionally prolonged. There was no
fear of not having enough statues to sell if a ship should put in.
The image the artist was fashioning was destined to become the
tabernacle of a spirit or an ornament he would wear round his neck
during festivals. This purpose does not, however, explain either the
sculptor’s patience or his meticulous workmanship, which spring
from a deeper emotion—the joy of creating a perfect work of art.

The same desire for perfection characterizes the products of stone-
masonry. A stone hammer without a handle is a clumsy tool with
which to turn a block of basalt into a polished slab that will exactly
fit against its neighbour. Teams of obscure workmen devoted long
days, perhaps months, to this unrewarding task. The results were
those few gems of primitive architecture which, like the Vinapau
ahu, present a surface as smooth as a marble slab.

The arts and crafts reviewed above almost all belong to a bygone
age. They have not entirely disappeared, for they have left behind
a certain tradition of craftsmanship which the islanders have
adapted to different techniques. A relic of the respect that formerly
surrounded the wood-carver may be seen in the current predilection
for joinery, which involves the same precious material.

--- PAGE 90 ---
CHAPTER V

A Cannibal Society

The two confederations—The social hierarchy—The king—The
priests—T he crafismen—The warriors—Commoners and slaves—
Social relations—War and cannibalism

Ir any inhabitant of Hanga-roa village is asked the name of his
tribe, he will unhesitatingly reply Marama, Tupa-hotu, Nga-ure or
Miru, as the case may. be, even if his father is British or Chilean. If

essed, he will give the tribal affiliation of his mother and even of

is grandparents, and will point out the approximate boundaries of
the ancestral territory. Thirty years ago, some old people were still
able to name the sub-tribes of each district with their respective
sanctuaries.

This, unfortunately, is the limit of our knowledge of Easter
Island’s social organization as it was less than a century ago.

The significance of the hierarchy, the ties of family and tribe,
were broken first by the chaos that followed the sudden disappear-
ance of part of the population in 1863, and then by the epidemics
that decimated the remaining inhabitants of the island. The con-
centration of the survivors in the village of Hanga-roa, after their
conversion to Christianity, destroyed the last vestiges of the social
order. Tribal patriotism alone was strong enough to live on, in an
attenuated form, in the memory of the present generation.

A list of names, geographical frontiers, and vague allusions in
legends do not provide much of a foundation on which to’ recon-
struct a politcal and social system of some complexity, but they
sufficiently indicate the general outline.

At the beginning of the nineteenth century the population of
Easter Island was divided into ten ‘tribes’ or mata, whose members
considered themselves descendants of eponymous or name-giving
ancestors, who, in their turn, were held to be the offspring of the
first king, Hotu-matu‘a.

Legendary history has it that on his deathbed Hotu-matu‘a
divided the island among his sons. The eldest, Tu‘u-maheke, in-

83

--- PAGE 91 ---
84 EASTER ISLAND

herited the title of ariki-mau (king) and received the stretch of coast
between Anakena and Mount Teatea; Miru had the lands between
Anakena and Hanga-roa; Marama, the seaboard south of Aka-
hanga to Vinapu; Rcteacies: the lava fields round Mount Rano-
seks 3 Hotu-iti became master of the whole eastern section of the
island; finally, Raa had to be content with the territories to the
north and cast of Mount Teatca. The Hau-moana do not figure in
this distribution, which assigned to each tribe its hereditary district,
but the king-lists contain a ruler of this name who seems to have
been the name-giver of this tribe.

A few new tribes formed at various times by breaking away from
another tribe, of which they were only a sub-division. By splitting
up, a family could give birth to a sub-tribe or lineage which sooner
or later claimed its independence. An example on
segmentation is to be found in the myth of the origin of the Raa
and the Hamea, who lived in the territory of the Miru,

In the course of one of their wars with the Tupa-hotu, the tribe
of the Miru was cut to picces and suffered great losses, Two
young men, Taka and Parapuna, succeeded in escaping from the
carnage along with Taka’s wife, who was pregnant. When she
was about to be delivered they took her to a cousin who lived in
cnemy territory. When his wife was recovered, Taka gave her to
Parapuna so that he, in his turn, could beget a child. woman
pa from one brother to the other every year, until each of
them had had by her a large number of sons and daughters who
became respectively the ancestors of the Raa and the Hamea, For
this reason these two tribes consider themselves closely related to
one another and to the Miru, from whom their ancestors issued:

The Tupa-hotu, the Ureohei and the Koro-orongo had no terri-
sid of their own, but were scattered at random over the region
ied Hotu-iti, in the cast of the island. This geographical name is
also that of Hotu-matu‘a’s youngest son, which suggests that he
may have been the eponym of a tribe that later split up and formed
three new tribes. This hypothesis would explain the use of the col-
lective term Hotu-iti for these three tribes, and their close associa-
tion in one and the same district.

The political geography of the island was complicated by the fact

--- PAGE 92 ---
A CANNIBAL SOCIETY 85

that, by the time the historical period opened, the members of a
tribe no longer lived exclusively in their ancestral territory. For
example, many Miru families were living in the Marama district.
This interpenetration of the tribe by another, surprising as it may
appear, is explained by intermarriage and the system of adoption,
which enabled children to retain their rights to the lands of their
true father or to inherit from their mother. Those seeking refuge
with neighbours after a defeat in battle were entitled to settle
amongst the latter while still preserving their affiliation to their own
tribe. Easter Island was too tiny a world for groups to remain
isolated in watertight compartments, in spite of mutual hates and
hostilities,

Tribal territory was divided among the descendants of the various
ancestors grouped together to form mata-iti, that is, sub-tribes or
lineages corresponding to the hapu of the Maoris. The lands belong-
ing to the mata-iti were narrow strips stretching back from the
coast towards the centre of the island. The areas nearest the sea
were the most densely populated and also the most important from
an economic point of view. The closer it lay to the middle of the
island the lower was the value of the land and the less heed was
paid to the boundaries of each property. The ata, that is, the centre
of the island, was left to the vanquished, who—dispossessed of their
lands—eked out a miserable existence far from the ocean and its
treasures. It was also the realm of spirits.

The link between the lineage and its territory was symbolized by
an ahw that stood near the shore and was both the group’s cemetery
and its common sanctuary. These ruined mausoleums that succeed
one another all the way round the island are the last tangible expres-
sion of the territorial rights exercised by the ancient sub-tribes, now
no more. The great mausoleum of Anakena belonged to the Honga
sub-tribe, which gave the island its kings.

In the old days the natives tended to live communally in large
huts. Even today, although the modern houses are of modest dimen-
sions, it is quite common to find them occupied not only by the
owner and his family, but also by his brothers and cousins. This
cohesion reveals a type of family organization known as the ex-
tended family (ivi). It might be composed of several brothers living
together with their wives and children, or of various families be-


--- PAGE 93 ---
86 EASTER ISLAND

longing to different generations but grouped round the grandfather
or peak preadniher It was dinbtless fegedemey the chief and
representative of this social unit, who was honoured with the title
tangata-honui (respectable man, man of importance).

The réle of the extended family in the overall social structure is
unknown to us. By analogy with the rest of Polynesia, we may sup-
pose that it possessed lass in common and that its members co-
Operated in agriculture and fishing. War united them in a single
foc: Legends have transmitted to us an echo of this family solidar-
ity. In accounts of battles we always see brothers acting in concert
or going to one another's aid.

Above the tribes, the lineages and the extended families that formed
the skeleton of socicty there existed a broader organization, political
in origin. The ten tribes or mata were split into two groups that
were probably nothing more or less than two hostile confederations.
The tribes of the west and north-west were generally referred to as
the people of Tu'u, the name of a yolcanic cone near Hanga-roa.
They were also known, for obscure reasons, as the ‘great tribes’
(mata-nui). The tribes of the east or ‘little tribes’ appear in historical
legends as the * people of Hotw-iti’.
This dualism was probably the nr le and consequence of a
constant state of war between the tribes occupying the two extrem-
ities of the island. Legends frequently allude to the hatred and wars
between the Tuy and the Hotu-iti, whose struggles continued,
with varying fortunes, for many gencrations, The victors unified
the island until the moment when the vanquished felt strong
h to renew the conflict. This secular antagonism eventually
manifested itself in the religious sphere. The sacred places common
to all the tribes were divided into two sections, corresponding to
the island's two factions. The rock of Motu-nui, for example, was
divided in two by a statue that served as a boundary mark, In the
course of the national festival of the bird-man, the chanters of the
cast refused to intone their sacred chants in concert with those from
the west.

The sense of hicrarchy, as manifested in the past, is completely
dead. A century ago, however, this society was as rigorously strati-

--- PAGE 94 ---
A CANNIBAL SOCIETY 87

fied as that of New Zealand and the Society Islands. At the top of
the ladder was the ariki-maw, or great chief, whom we have referred
to as the king of the island. Below him, it is said, came the priests
(ivi-atua) and the ariki-paka or nobles. The latter title is still given
to all members of the Miru tribe, without distinction. It seems
strange that all the individuals belonging to such a large tribe
should have been honoured with the title of ‘chicf’, when there is
no question of an ariki in any other tribe. This is an anomaly con-
trary to Polynesian traditions. To resolve this contradiction, I often
tried to explain to our informants that, in my opinion, all the Miru
could not have been nobles; but this supposition was always indig-
nantly rejected. “All the Miru were ariki-paka, and they were the
only ariki-paka there were.’ In one sense, being of the king’s tribe
se | descendants of Hotu-matu‘a, the Miru a claim to the title
of nobility; but how is the absence of ariki in the other tribes to be
interpreted? The only parallel to such a system in the whole of Poly-
nesia is afforded by te Nga-ariki of Mangaia: all the priests of this
island had to belong to this tribe. In any event, the position of the
nobles in Easter Island society is far from clear. According to the
evidence of one missionary, they occupied a secondary place in the
social order to the priests, but the latter were no doubt recruited
from their class.

The matato‘a or warriors came fourth in the social scale. At the
very bottom of the ladder we find the fio. This word, which may
be translated, according to the context, as ‘vanquished enemy’, or
‘servant’, or ‘farmer’, was applied to individuals in subordinate
positions. The craftsmen, technicians or experts, who belonged to a
guild, held a distinguished rank; but in the present state of our

ledge we cannot place it exactly in the social hierarchy.

_ This gradation of social classes is misleading when we are con-
sidering political power. The matato‘a, who were not nobles, were
hot on the same social plane as the king or the ariki, but they were
none the less the wielders of authority. In the following pages |
shall 5 db outline the precise functions and prerogatives of cach of
these classes,

One day, when we were examining a petroglyph representing
turtles, in the company of Tepano, we steed ben whether these

--- PAGE 95 ---
88 EASTER ISLAND

creatures were still hunted asin days gone by. He replied in a voice
tinged with melancholy: ‘The curries stopped coming here after the
kings died.’ Then he added: *Many other things vanished with the
kings. There used to be a variety of yam that was bigger and more
succulent than the yams of today. It too died out with the lineage
of the kings, The sandalwood tree, of which King Hotu-matu‘a
brought a shoot in his boat and which flourished on the island, no
longer grows here. The kings are gone, and the sandalwood is gone.”

*Phese reflections on the part of our informant made us think of
the last ariki-maw, little Gregorio, who died of tuberculosis at the
Catholic Mission around 1867. Easter Island’s decline was, in a way,
symbolized by the rapid decline of this frail descendant of the
The only function left to surviving royalty in the charnel-house
which the island had become, lay in the mystic link uniting the
ariki-mau to the fertilizing forces of nature. After the harvest the
natives still came in procession to pay tribute of the first fruits to the
heir of Hotu-matu‘a. The bearers of the yams headed the proces-
sion, followed by two files of young men ing standards made
of kau branches, peeled and stained black. They advanced to the
sound of hymns mingled with exclamations of respect.

Te is in this last tribute offered to the little king, as in the associa-
tion with the plants and turtles, that the essence of royalty is best
ex . As in the Marquesas and Tonga, the king was a sacred
being whose magic ie influenced nature and assured his people

a supply of

Thee ym the vegetable and animal kingdoms was the out-
come of the king's mystic force, his mana, which had been trans-
mitted to him by his divine ancestors. (It is probable that the Easter
Island ariki, like many Polynesian chiefs, were held to be descend-
ants from the gods Tangaroa and Rongo. This, at any rate, is the
most likely in tion of the occurrence of these two names
among the first kings of the island.)

This power is celebrated in lyrical terms in a hymn collected on
Easter Island in 1886. The transcription was full of errors and
arbitrary omissions, while the translation was not merely free but
fanciful. T was able partially to reconstruct the original version,
thanks to the combined efforts of my native informants and experts
in Polynesian languages.

--- PAGE 96 ---
A CANNIBAL SOCIETY 89

What does the king make fertile in the country?

Mars comes up, appears in the sky. The king makes the shoots
of the white sweet-potatoes grow in the country.

He makes the sweet-potatoes favourable, the sky favourable,
the ancestors favourable.

What does the king make fertile in the country?
The crayfish, the po’opo’o fish, the conger eels, the nohu
fish, the moss, the ferns and the kavakava-atua plants.

What does the king make fertile in the country?

The mosses, the ferns, the kavakava-atua plants, the king
makes grow in the country.

He makes the mosses favourable, he makes the ferns
favourable, he makes the roots of the kavakava-atua
favourable.

W hat does the king make fertile in the country?

He introduces the tunny fish, the atu fish, and the ature fish.

He makes the tunny fish favourable, he makes the atu
favourable, he makes the ature favourable too,

What does the king make fertile in the country?

The turtle, its abdominal shell, its legs—these he makes
grow in the country.

He makes the turtle, its abdominal shell and its legs favourable.

What does the king make fertile in the country?

The stars, the sky, the heat, the sun, the moon, the king
increases their strength.

He makes the sky, the heat, the sun, and the moon favourable.

What does the king make fertile in the country?
He sends the dew, the heat, the sun, and the moon.

What does the king make fertile in the country?
Worms, earwigs, beetles, the king makes fertile in the country.
He makes the worms, the earwigs, the beetles favourable,

he makes them grow in the country.

--- PAGE 97 ---
90 EASTER ISLAND

This power over nature was concentrated in the eldest son; but
sometimes it developed such intensity that it risked becoming the
source of numberless evils, The legend of the little prince Rokoroko-
hetau, son of the third wife of King Nga‘ara, affords a famous
example of this. The case is particularly curious because this king's
son had, by birth, no right to royal dignity. His entry into
world was accompanied by wonders such as generally announced
the birth of a great chief. Many people were devoured by sharks,
and sea beasts appeared on the shore and attacked those who ven-
tured there. Finally, white fowl—hitherto unknown—began to mul-
tiply. These miraculous events were manifestations of Rokoroko-
heatu’s mana. In the hope of averting these disasters and saving
his people, the reigning king had his son taken away and shut up
in a cave on Mount Rano-aroi. In vain—because his subjects, con-
vinced of the sanctity of the little chief ‘with the diadem of white
feathers’, refused to carry before the legitimate heir the standards
symbolic of royalty. In the end Nga‘ara had his son, whose mystic
power had-such baleful effects, put to death.

Another legend, any peel obscure and incomplete, deals
with the dangerous manifestations of royal mana.

Tangaroa | does this refer to the god of this name or to a
king?] was walking along the southern shore with his brother
when he found a hen and copulated with it. He killed it, plucked
it, and put it in a basin, An old woman passed by this place and
heard a child crying from inside the stomach of the hen in the
basin. She took the child to her home, cared for him, and named
him Tu-ki-haka-he-vari [ Curled-up-as-a-chicken-in-an-egg]. He
grew up and stayed with her at Hakarava. One day he asked the
old woman, ‘Where is my father?* She replied, “There, where
there is a dark cloud.’ Then the boy called to the people, ‘Make a
litter to carry me to Tu'v.’ Many men came in relays to carry
him, but those who touched his litter fell dead ‘because of his
mana’, Near a place called Pare, the king caught sight of two
very ugly girls. He called out to them, ‘Go back, O you ugly
women, You are throwing dust in the eyes of King Tu-ki-haka-
he-vari.’ | With this ambiguous sentence the legend ends. ]

The king carried in a litter, contact with which kills the common

--- PAGE 98 ---
A CANNIBAL SOCIETY 91

people, is a typical sacred chief of Polynesia, the Easter Island
equivalent of the Tahitian arii, who travelled on a man's back so as
not to communicate their mana to their subjects’ land.

The ariki-mau was isolated from his subjects by numerous tabus
which, on the one hand, stressed his divinity and, on the other, pro-
tected mortals from contagion by his mana. His head was the most
sacred part of his person, that which was surrounded by the strictest
tabus. It may have been enough for him to call an object ‘my head”
to render it untouchable. He wore his hair long, for no hand was
holy enough to cut it. When the missionaries wanted, for reasons
of hygiene, to shave the head of the young king whom oy had
taken under their protection, the child rebelled and only yielded to
threats. His hair was cut by a Mangarevan catechist, but popular
indignation was so intense that the sacrilegious foreigner was very
nearly stoned.

Although many activities were forbidden them, these sacred
leaders could indulge in the pleasures of fishing and were permitted
to make their own tackle. They sia be seen sitting in front of
their huts rolling on their thighs mulberry-bark fibre, with
which they madc fishing lines, or weaving nets with the aid of a
shuttle. But woe betide anyone who touched the objects that shared
their mana.

The king lived alone in his hut, which he did not share even with
his wife, who occupied another hut next door. Two sorts of servant,
belonging to the Miru tribe, ministered to his needs. The tu‘ura
calevased the fields of the royal domain and accompanied him when
he went fishing. The Aaka-papa his meals and served him
at table. When these servants left the king's presence, they walked
backwards, Those who wished to communicate with the king
i Serie nto Pyle 5 a

the intricacy and extent of his tattooing distingui
king fons beer Ramee Islanders. No doubt shee pay ai
and better-painted cloak than his subjects and especially fine orna-
ments of wood and shell.

When Easter Island had appeared in a dream to Hotu-matu‘a in
the country of Marae-tenga, he sent six young men to reconnoitre
and take possession of it. As they were leaving, he requested them
to look for a sandy beach, on which he would establish his resi-

--- PAGE 99 ---
g2 EASTER ISLAND

dence. These scouts paddled all round the island, putting in at all
the coves; but they were not satisfied with any of them until they
came to Anakena, which alone seemed to them worthy of the king.
Here Hotu-matu‘a landed and here his first son, Tu‘u-ma-heke, was
born. Anakena is still closely associated with memories of the
ancient ariki. Every time our excavations brought to light a skull,
the workmen remarked, ‘There’s the head of another ariki’.

Anakena cove is the pleasantest spot on the island, the place most
deeply impregnated with the melancholy charm peculiar to certain
Polynesian landscapes. The sea here is transparent and slightly
a The sand, formed of pulverized shells, crackles beneath the

eet, and on all sides rise volcanic eminences, gently rounded heaps

of reddish scoria. To the rear of the beach stand rows of royal
mausoleums, lined up like so many bastions to defend its peace.
Some’are barely visible in the midst of lapilli, others are half buried
by sand. The wind uncovers statues and whited bones, only to inter
them afresh as the whim takes it.

It was in this privileged cove, where one can swim at leisure with-
out fear of the waves and reefs, that the Honga lineage resided,
whose chief was the ariki-mau. Avenues bordered with sticks bear-.
ing garlands of feathers led to it, but only the king and the queen
or queens and their servants were entitled to go on the beach. It
was a tabu zone, and those who ventured into it were put to death.
One of the present natives of the island had been told by an old man
that in his youth the king’s son had invited him to come and play
with him on the beach. Some men who had seen him threw them-
selyes upon him to kill him, but he managed to run away. The
king’s son ordered the guards not to pursue him.

A rather vague tradition has it that the king’s eldest son was
brought up in a village adjoining the Papa-o-pea ahu, which is in a

, good state of preservation. After becoming Fin , the young chief
resided at Ahu-akapu, near Tahai, on the west coast. It was only
when he had relinquished his title in favour of his eldest son that
the king returned to Anakena to end his days.

In conformity with a custom frequent in Polynesia, the king lost
his rank on the birth of his eldest son. The mana that had been in
him passed into the little being, who became in his turn the inter-
mediary between the tribe and the gods. In point of fact, the king

--- PAGE 100 ---
A CANNIBAL SOCIETY 93

retained his power in his capacity of regent until his heir was old
enough to fulfil his functions. This date was determined by his
marriage; after which the old king sank into oblivion.

Our knowledge of the king’s powers and duties is very incom-

letc, but onc of his functions was to impose and remove tabus. No
eae could be occupied before the ariki-mau or an ariki represent
ing him had entered, no doubt to perform some propitiatory rites
within. The same applied to boats, which had to be ‘inspected’ by
the king before being launched on the sca.

During the winter months sea-fishing lay under an interdict, At
this period only the king and his family cota cat fish without being
poisoned. They were kept in isolation, because their Hatulence was
a danger to their entourage.

The tunny caught by the fishermen on the first sea trip at the

inning of summer were brought to the king, who ate them in
the company of his family. The livery of the first catch, and this
meal, lifted the tabu on fish and rendered them noa, that is, pro-
fane. Thereafter, they could be caten by everyone. In time of
drought, prayers for rain were addressed to Hiro under the king’s
auspices.

Tradition also shows him to us making tours of the island to
inspect the schools for priests and listen to recitations of the sacred
chants associated with various economic and social activities.

All these functions are religious in character and make it plain
that the king was head of the college of priests, but we do not know
whether he was compelled to learn the genealogies and chants that
constituted the science of the peeethood.

The political authority of the ariki-mau is not clear. On this point
we are reduced to conjecture. Although he was the civil leader of
the Miru, he was not regarded by the other tribes as more than an
extremely sacred personage. The in which he was held did
not spare him the fate of a captive when the Miru were defeated by
their rivals.

During the first half of the nineteenth century King Nga‘ara was
a prisoner of the Hotu-iti for several years and forced to live in the
district of the Nga-ure.

Political power seems to have fallen into the hands of the mata-
to‘a, who formed an aristocracy of happy warriors. Royalty would

D

--- PAGE 101 ---
94 EASTER ISLAND

doubtless have disappeared if the king had not been invested with
the mana necessary for the continuance of natural processes and the
prosperity of the island.

It is as though an obscure prescntiment of things to come united
the destiny of this socicty to that of its kings. When lite Gregorio
died, the old civilization vanished with him, and ‘the turtles went

away, never to return’.

Religion was too intimately linked with the life of Polynesian
socictics for the prestige of he iesthood not to have been close to
that of the nobles. In point of fact, the two orders were so nearly
related that it is difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish pri
from aristocrat in the island’s traditions. This confusion is pa ate
due to the fact that the members of the royal family and the servants
of the gods were subject to the same tabus and lived in the same
mystic atmosphere. Moreover, we may be certain that the high
priest was chosen from the immediate family of the king.

Even the word for priest—ivi-atua (family of the gods)}—expresses
their relationship with the dicties. They were the vessels, or, to use
the Polynesian expression, the ‘boats of the gods’. They formed a
hierarchy whose legrees are totally confused in the recollection of
the Christian tions. Every rite or act Sasa ied religion is
indiscriminatel attributed to the ivi-atua, who are ibed at one
moment as vulgar sorcerers, and at the next as agents of a more
lofty cult.

Priestly functions must have been specialized. Those who offici-
ated at the royal sanctuaries were the bearers of traditions both
sacred and secular. This is proved by the collapse of the island's
religious tradition that followed the brutal kidnapping of the mem-
bers of the priestly caste in 1862.

The priests whom the missionaries met in the island had more
modest functions. They presided over domestic festivals on the
occasion of the birth of a child and exorcized spirits from the
bodies of the sick. The lowest members of the hierarchy were the
humble priests or magicians who ministered to the needs of the
poor.

Were the highly-placed oe wealthy? Undoubtedly, for they
disposed of the offerings of fowls, fish and tubers that were made

--- PAGE 102 ---
A CANNIBAL SOCIETY 95

to the gods. Their may have been formidable, for the high
priests appointed victims of the human sacrifices.

rank occupied by local priests, medicine-men and sorcerers,
is difficult to determine. They probably fell within the category of
cammoners and their prestige ieeeAat on the success of their cures
and charms,

In his capacity asa ‘technician’ in divine matters, the priest was
related to the specialists in other fields. The craftsman also had to
possess traditional tricks of the trade and be acquainted with the
rites and charms that would render his work effective and guard it
from danger. The same word, abe often designated both the
priest the craftsman in other Polynesian languages.
In the current dialect of the island, every expert craftsman, of
whatever type, is a maori. The word tahunga is unknown to the
t generation, although it existed in the ancient vocabulary. It
pamrerins fragmentary chant, the meaning of which is obscure.
He naunau no ta Puku-naunau, There is a sandalwood tree in
Puku-naunau.
He rongorongo no ta Orongo. There is a chanter at Orongo.
He tahonga no ta Pukwtahonga. There is an expert craftsman
in Puku-tahonga.
He kiakia no ta Puku-kiakia. There is a kiakia bird in Pukukiakia.

The craftsmen were probably banded together in guilds with
traditional skills and a ciadiciogsl cult. Their social eee natur-
ally depended on the importance of their activities to the island’s
ccanomic life. One of the few guilds whose existence is historically
certain is that of the sculptors of the statues, who enjoyed great
prestige. Fifty-odd years ago some Easter Islanders still spoke with
pride of their ancestors who had carved the great images. One of
them, who was Thomson's guide, lost no opportunity of recalling
that his grandfather, a certain Uratahui, had been a celebrated

sculptor.

Rie calc wextbiastan wie takecd by his father in the practice
of his art, and succeeded him. The guilds were nevertheless open to
all those who gave proof of talent. The master craftsman received
the orders and supervised their execution. There were also associa-

--- PAGE 103 ---
96 EASTER ISLAND

tions of high-seas fishermen, who used large nets and owned boats
in common.

The matato‘a or ‘warrior’ is a familiar figure in historical legends.
The word ‘warrior’ only partially expresses the rdle of these per-
sonages, for the matato‘a was above all a warrior who inspired
terror, the leader of a band. Like the South American caudillo, he
was both a civil and military leader. The matato‘a is a common
Polynesian type: in the Marquesas, the mazato‘a were the military
leaders of these warlike people. The kaia or man-eater is his equiva-
lent on Mangareva, where he assumed the political power of the
ariki.

In a society as turbulent as that of Easter Island the matato‘a,
taking advantage of the fear they inspired, finally exercised power,
first over their own tribe and then over other tribes. The most
famous of these great warriors was Kainga who, beginning as chief
of the eastern tribes, eventually established his authority over the
whole island.

The political position of the mazato‘a on Easter Island was much
stronger than that of the warriors in the rest of Polynesia, where
they were subordinate to the ariki. Once again, Mangaia affords a

allel; for there, just as on Easter Island, power might be in the
ds of the warrior who had won a decisive victory.

Certain obscure occurrences that took place on Easter Island be-
fore the eyes of the missionaries acquire a meaning if they are inter-
preted as attempts on the part of mazato‘a to surround themselves
with the religious prestige due to the king. Some matato‘a had the
first catch of the Eaing season presented to them just as if they
were the ariki-mau himself. The Orongo ceremonies bestowed
divine sanction on their hegemony, for the matato‘a whose servant
found the first manu-tara egg became the “yessel’ of the great god
Makemake.

Commoners were called, as on Mangareva, huru-manu. That is all
we know about them. The position of the kio or serf is better
known. The members of a vanquished tribe scattered or hid in
caves to avoid massacre. Once the fury of the battle had died down
they were spared, but became io, and the victors took them to their

--- PAGE 104 ---
A CANNIBAL SOCIETY 97

lands, which they were compelled to till. At night they were herded
into a cavern under an armed guard. Those who were sent back to
their own district were liable to have their crops appropriated by
their masters. Discouraged, they planted only what was strictly
necessary to satisfy their basic $.

The term Kio was also applied to a farmer who had placed him-
self under the aegis of a warrior, to whom he paid regular * protec-
tion money’. Those who farmed for a wealthier individual, because
they had no land of their own, fell into the same category.

It is doubtful whether social relations as they may be observed in
the village of Hanga-roa give an accurate idea of individual be-
haviour in the pre-European communities. The families formed
larger groups, and those who were united by ties of blood had a
greater sense of solidarity and ayoided mutual quarrels or robbery.
‘The Polynesians who colonized Easter Island no doubt preserved
those habits of courtesy and hospitality so often described in con-
nection with other South Sea islands. These mercurial and whim-
sical people were capable of giving frec rein to violent passions and
even of committing acts of cruelty; but once the outburst was over,
the guilty parties recovered the lighthearted and friendly disposition
that still cterizes their descendants.

Weecan catch no glimpse of relations between individuals save the
exterior forms and tokens of politeness. The Easter Islanders paid
ee attention to good manners. Every member of the upper classes

to know how to behave on at occasion. Certain words had
to be avoided if they constituted allusions to some misadventure
that had befallen the interlocutor or his family. Any reference tg a
case of cannibalism of which a person's family had es the victim
constituted one of those insults that might unleash an armed con-
flict. The susceptibility of a Polynesian aristocrat sometimes
assumed morbid proportions. Even today an unfortunate word
uttered without malice may cause a violent outburst of anger.

When a chief paid a visit to the chief of another tribe he was met
along the road by groups of warriors, who formed an escort. On
these occasions no debe the chanters recited long genealogies, as is
still done on the Tuamotus. The two chiefs advanced to meet and
pressed the wings of their noses together, inhaling deeply, as though

--- PAGE 105 ---
98 EASTER ISLAND

to absorb the breath of the guest or friend. This salutation is called
hongi. Today the word is used to describe the European kiss, which
the islanders have borrowed from us. Nevertheless, mothers still
express their tender feclings towards their babies by running their
noses over their bodies and sniffing their brown flesh.

A European who was present at the welcome accorded to a long
absent relative or friend, a century ago, would have been both
shocked and surprised. First, he would have observed total indiffer-
ence on both sides, The newcomer’s mother would not look at him,
even if she passed close by him, but would hurry to join a group of
relatives and friends who suddenly broke out into lamentations and
allowed floods of tears to pour down their checks. The individual
who was the object of these manifestations joined the even and
showed every sign of utter despair. This outburst of grief lasted up
to half an hour; then the weepers dried their tears, assumed a j
expression, and each in turn rubbed noses with the traveller.
everyone gave free rein to his joy and the absent one regained his
place in the group.

The motivations for these lachrymose welcomes are hard to deter-
mine. They probably vary from onc culture to another. It has been
said that the absent one was regarded, until he had proved the
contrary, as a spirit, and that—as a precaution—his death was
mourned to placate him. Other writers have asserted that the natives
were expressing their sympathy with the traveller for the trials and
tribulations he had endured. Reference has also been made to male-
ficent influences emanating from every individual returned from
forcign parts, pernicious effiavia which the tears were intended to
exorcise. In Polynesia, such a welcome scems to form part of mourn-
ing: the relative returning to the bosom of the family is invited to
weep for those who have died during his absence, and his tears
on his participation in the griefs of the members of his group.

se who have left their country for a long period may be
reccived in a manner that, to our way of thinking, is even
and more unintelligible. Parents soit friends are not content with
weeping, but indulge in outright assault: the traveller, instead of
receiving the Polynesian equivalent of a kiss, is beaten or chased
away under the threat of blows. These aggressive actions are not the
expression of any sort of animosity: they convey the affection of the

--- PAGE 106 ---
A GANNIBAL SOCIETY 9

people who are reproaching him with havin; forsaken them and
perhaps of having caused, the mere fact of his absence, all the
misfortunes that took place before his return.

This is the correct interpretation of an incident related by one of
the French Fathers. An Raster Islander, who had been absent a
long time, returned to the island on board a whaleboat; his relatives
iad friends recognized him before he had even pues out of the
vessel that was carrying him ashore. Instead of running to ai
him, they began to throw stones at him and prevent hi
setting foot on the island. The stoning did not let until the voy-
ager’s wife had rushed into his arms and cov him with her
body. The missionary who reports the scene explains it as duc to
the fear felt by the natives on seeing the beige bess man they
perhaps belicved dead. These acts of violence may also be con-
structed as an excess of courtesy signifying to the relative or friend
who has returned the bitterness caused by his long absence.

The Easter Islanders, like many Polynesians, very easily.
The slightest object that recalls someone who is is capable of
moving them to tears. An Easter Island girl recognized in Thom-
son's book a photograph of her father, who had died while she was
still very young; she none the Iess shed bitter tears every time she
saw it. When she came to sec us she said, ‘Show me my father’s
picture so that I may weep,’ and as soon as it was given to her she
sobbed as though her heart would break.

The Tahitian Ja-o-rana has replaced the ancient grecting, Ka oho
mai repa rivariva (Come here, good-looking young man or young
girl), to which the reply was, Ka koe (You too). Parents greet their
children with the eas Aue poki (Ah, my child). These phrases
are uttered in a trembling, tearful voice. We heard them on the lips
of the old queen whenever we visited her.

War, like music and dancing, must have been a powerful diversion
in a world where existence tended to become monotonous. This
feeling is not unknown in our own culture and was certainly even
commoner in a society wherein distractions were few and unvary-
ing. Social life demanded that passions should be held in check, and
accumulated rancour inevitably found an outlet in military

expeditions.

--- PAGE 107 ---
100 EASTER ISLAND

The political life of Easter Island, as we glimpse it through
legends and accounts left by missionaries, was a perpetual succes-
sion of wars and rivalries between tribes—particularly between the
eastern and western tribes.

The main causes of these conflicts were often insignificant; but
once blood had been spilt the struggle might go on for several
generations. Easter Island sensitiveness is illustrated by a tale that
is perhaps only half legendary. A young boy, having seen an eel
close to the beach, asked a man standing nearby to help him catch
it. The latter came and frightened away the eel by poking it with a
stick. The boy went away vexed and angry. As soon as he had gone,
the man caught the eel with a running noose attached to a stick.
The child saw him and came back to claim the eel that he had been
the first to discover. The man took no notice of his demand and
walked away in the direction of his hamlet, followed by the boy,
who continued to pester him with his protests. He entered a hare-
hui (a large feasting-hut) where, amongst other things, a dish of eels
was about to be prepared. When they were cooked and ready to be
served, the child claimed his portion; but he was only given the tip
of a tail. Then he went away and complained to his ice ‘I come
from the interior of the island, from a big hut where a feast is being
celebrated, but I was only given the tal of the eel that I was the
first to see. The man who caught it refused to give it to me.’
Without a word, the father took his cudgel and went to the
ee of the feast, where everyone was sleeping, drowsy from the

quet. He took advantage of this to club the thief and his
guests to death. This massacre unleashed a war that went on for
several years.

The power of the matato‘a, of which I have spoken above, is
itself a testimony to the warlike nature of Easter Island society.
When hostilities had opened, the warriors stained their bodies black
and spent their last night at home preparing their weapons and
hiding their most precious possessions. They ate food cooked by
their fathers in a separate oven. They were not allowed to close their
eyes all night. At dawn the troop set out, followed by the women
and children. On the way, charms were recited or chants sung that
gave courage and turned the wrath of the spirits against the adver-
sary. The procession of non-combatants accompanied the warriors

--- PAGE 108 ---
A CANNIBAL SOCIETY 10r

p*

--- PAGE 109 ---
102 EASTER ISLAND

to the vicinity of the battlefield and watched the triumph or defeat
of their party from the top of a hill.

When the two hostile troops were face to face, they provoked
each other with outrageous insults and then started the battle by
throwing stones. In the hands of the Easter Islanders these were
a redoubtable weapon, of which they made frequent use. The hail
of stones was followed by volleys of javelins, whose obsidian points
tore the skin and opened gaping wounds. After this exchange of
missiles the warriors attacked with the little short, flat club, identi-
cal with the New Zealand patu. Some, however, preferred the long
club with sharp edges. Blows fell thick and fast until one group,
having lost some of its warriors, fled from the field. The victors
rushed in pursuit of the vanquished, slaying or taking prisoner
those who fell into their hands. After this, they entered their
enemies’ territory where they burnt down the huts and laid waste
the crops. Women and children were led into captivity. If earlier
battles had exacerbated passions and created a spirit of revenge, the
prisoners were tortured. Their skulls were broken with blows from
an adze, they were buried alive, or trampled upon until their bellies
burst and their entrails spilled out. To escape these reprisals, the
vanquished fled across the island and hid in caves or implored the
protection of relatives or friends belonging to another tribe. Tradi-
tional legends of the island relate the outcome of these battles in
almost stereotyped sentences: ‘. . . They were cut in pieces. The
vanquished, seized with panic, took refuge in caverns, where the
victors sought them out. The men, women and children who were
captured were eaten.’

If a high-ranking chief figured among the prisoners, he was not
only eaten but his skull was burnt, to inflict a supreme outrage on
his memory and his family.

The attraction of these military expeditions was rendered even
greater by the prospect of banquets consisting of the corpses of the
enemy. After all, man was the only large mammal whose flesh was
available.

Victoria Rapahango told us that in her youth she had known the
last cannibals on the island. They were the terror of little children.
Every Easter Islander knows that his ancestors were kai-tangata,

--- PAGE 110 ---
A CANNIBAL SOCIETY 103

‘man-eaters’. Some make jokes about it, others take offence at any
allusion to this custom which has become in their eyes barbarous and
shameful. According to Father Roussel, cannibalism did not dis-
appear from Easter Island until after the introduction of Christian-
ee Shortly before this, the natives are said to have eaten a number

men, including two Peruvian traders. Cannibal feasts were held
in secluded spots, and women and children were rarely admitted.
The natives told Father Zumbohm that the fingers and toes were
the choicest morsels.

The captives destined to be eaten were shut up in huts in front of
the sanctuaries. There they were kept until the moment when they
were sacrificed to the gods.

The Easter Islanders’ cannibalism was not exclusively a religious
rite or the expression of an urge for revenge: it was also induced by
a simple liking for human flesh that could impel a man to kill for
no other reason than his desire for fresh meat. Women and children
were the principal victims of these inveterate cannibals. The re-
prisals that followed such crimes were all the more violent because
an act of cannibalism committed against the member of a family
was a terrible insult to the whole family. As among the ancient
Maoris, those who had taken part in the meal were entitled to show
their teeth to the relatives of the victim and say, ‘Your flesh has
stuck between my teeth’, Such remarks were capable of rousing
those to whom they were addressed to a murderous rage not very
different from the Malay amok.

One of the most dramatic spectacles Easter Island offered in days
gone by was that of the rites of vengeance observed when a murder
had been committed. The body was carried to a mausoleum and a
priest stayed with it all night, brandishing a palette of wood and
bone and reciting incantations and spells. From time to time he
went to the dead man and turned him over. The family gathered
behind the priest mingled its lamentations with the funerary chants
and waited for the moment when they could wreak vengeance on
the murderer's relatives.

--- PAGE 111 ---
CHAPTER VI

From Birth to the Tomb

Birth and childhood—Games and sports—Adolescence—Sex life
and marriage—Death and funerals

Ar rue third or fifth month of pregnancy, but never in the fourth
or sixth—even numbers being reputedly unlucky—the father-in-law
would offer his daughter-in-law the contents of an umu (under-
ground oven), called the umu-takapu-kokoma-moa, ‘the ceremonial
oven with the intestines of fowls’. This name referred to the fact
that the intestines roasted on the glowing stones of the oven were
given to the expectant mother as titbits. The rest of the food was
distributed among the members of the two families allied by mar-
riage. If the woman’s father was rich he inyited his son-in-law’s
aes to a banquet, but this was a simple courtesy without ritual
significance. The ceremonial meal (rae) bore a resemblance to the
presentation of the first-fruits to the chiefs. A mystic link existed
between the food eaten on this day and the child to be born: the
latter’s life was endangered if a rat came and gnawed the food
scraps left behind at the site of the feast.

A woman gave birth squatting or kneeling on the ground, She
was supported by her husband or some other person who pressed
her belly with his hands to hasten delivery. A stone heated to white
heat and wrapped in rushes, which was credited with a beneficent
influence, was placed beside her. ,

The umbilical cord was severed with the teeth by a man or
woman, and knotted according to a precise rite by a priest who was
called in at this moment. This ceremony owed its importance to
beliefs regarding the navel. In a man a ‘good navel’—that is to say,
a prominent navel—was in a way the symbol of his courage and
vigour. It was displayed with pride. In tying a newborn child’s
umbilical cord, the priest was enclosing in his body a vital force
(mana), which would otherwise have escaped from it. Every one of
the ceremonial actions performed on this occasion was governed by
ae and a mistake might have had serious consequences for

e :

104

--- PAGE 112 ---
FROM BIRTH TO THE TOMB 105

In the opinion of the Easter Islanders, this rite dated from the day
when the boat of the ariki Hotu-matu‘a touched Anakena beach.
No sooner had she disembarked than the king’s wife gave birth to a
son. Ariki Tu‘u-ko-ihu, a relation of the father and a very learned
priest, cut the umbilical cord and performed the rites destined to
strengthen the child’s mana, to call forth his ‘royal halo’ as the ori-
ginal text puts it. The magical value of the knot binding the navel
cord has survived to the present. There was also a mystic link between
the child and the priest who officiated at his birth. The dreams the
latter dreamed the night before the birth were interpreted as reveal-
ing the destiny of the newborn child. The cock the priest received
as a fee could not be killed, lest the baby’s mana be spoiled.

The dried umbilical cord was placed in a calabash and consigned
to the waves by the child’s maternal grandmother, with the simple
injunction, ‘Go away, be lost in a foreign country’. The cord could
also be hidden under a rock in a consecrated place. In this case the
formula of farewell was slightly different: the cord was enjoined,
‘Stay here, in this country, and be strong’. The ground in which
umbilical cords had been buried became tabu, and anyone walking
over it was liable to develop ulcers.

The baby was washed in a large calabash filled with water heated
with hot stones. Hot, flat stones were applied to the stomach of the
mother after childbirth to prevent the sckoanens of ugly folds;
but this precaution—if still practised—seems ineffective, a Easter
Island women are invariably afflicted with such folds after several
childbirths.

On the day of the child’s birth, the father gave a banquet to his
wife’s family. The first mouthful of this repast was reserved for the
young mother or, if she had no appetite, for her husband. This feast

a clearly ceremonial character. Certain dishes—sweet potatoes,
among others—were strictly excluded, and the scraps had to be very
carefully hidden. It was probably on this day that s child received
its name, which was given by a paternal aunt or uncle. This feast
was the first of a cycle that marked every stage of a child’s life up to
adolescence. On reaching the age of seven or eight months, his hair
was cut with an obsidian knife by one of his paternal uncles. On
this occasion he received a gift of fowls sent by one of his maternal
uncles. A similar present was given when he took his first steps or

--- PAGE 113 ---
106 EASTER ISLANB

put on his first breechcloth of tapa. At the age of seven or eight
years, the child’s legs were tattooed. The solemnity of this event de-
manded the celebration of a feast, in the course of which one of his
mother’s brothers made him a present of some thirty fowls. These
were tabu for the boy and his family, but there was nothing to pre- »
vent their being exchanged on the occasion of some other ceremony.

Sports occupied a place of honour in former times, as they did in all
other Polynesian societies. Surf riding, so popular on the beaches of
Honolulu, is still practised on Easter Island. Children swim out to
sea armed with a plank and wait for a big wave. The moment it
comes they turn round, seize the plank in both hands and, with legs
outstretched, allow themselves to be carried at full speed towards
the shoals. An incautious child, unable to stop in time, might be
hurled against the reefs with their knife-edged ridges. In au old
days, when wood was scarce, conical bundles of reeds were used
instead of surf-boards. Surf-riding demands great skill and even
courage. The bolder spirits disdain to mount the wave at the
moment it breaks, but go far out from the shore into the heavy surf,
where they can catch great unbroken swells. In the magnificent
story of Heru and Patu, the heroes reveal their divine origin by
‘naa! the submerged rocks and choosing the highest waves to
carry them towards the shore. Children vied with one another in
audacity and speed. For the malicious pleasure of seeing their com-
ions ‘dumped’, they used to recite the following p dee which
ad spell-binding power:

A Pua e, O Pua-te-oheohe e pua!

At the top of the wave there is a young man

He rises towards the sky

The sun, the foam

Ruahie

The wave breaks

It breaks, it has lost its force.

The children used to like sliding down the sides of the volcanoes
on toboggans of i leaves, a sport that was vi ular in all the
high islands of Polynesia. jase

The youngsters also used to indulge in sham battles. They

--- PAGE 114 ---
FROM BIRTH TO THE TOMB 107

divided into rival bands and attacked one another with harmless
javelins; but sometimes, carried away by warlike ardour, they threw
stones at cach other, which they learned to dodge with great agility.
According to a the discovery of obsidian weapons was the
outcome of one of these childish tussles. A boy belonging to a band
that had been routed cut his foot on a splinter of obsidian while in
flight. The accident gave him the idea of tipping his javelin with
a piece of this volcanic glass. His companions imitated him, and the
following day they attacked the victors of the previous day and
scored an easy, but bloody, victory over them. Their success pro-
voked reprisals and these mock combats gradually degenerated into
real battles.

Perhaps no game is as widespread throughout the world as that
which consists in making symbolic figures by interlacing with the
fingers a piece of string knotted end to end. On Easter Island this
pastime presents the iarity of being associated with short

s that were recited, rocking to and fro, when the string figure
ad been successful. Almost all the popular poetry that has
preserved by the modern population is connected with these cats’-
cradles. Even the poems included in their tales and legends are to
some extent illustrated by these figures. The natives attribute a
mnemotechnic yaluc to the string figures and liken them to their
ancestors’ wooden tablets.

The children also used to chant verses, which were perhaps spells
for the success of the game, when they spun their tops of nuts, clay
or stone. Here is one of them:

Spin the tops made of makoi shells that you gathered at the foot
of the cliff.

Oh, but these tops of wood are no good!

Let us spin tops made of red clay from the Rano-kao.

Kites, called manu hakarere (fying birds), probably came from
Asia with the ancestors of the Polynesians. They were made of thin
rods covered with tapa cloth on which was painted a bird.

These are ancient sports still remembered on Easter Island.

The first signs of puberty appear in the girls between the ages of
ten and eleven, and in a tos between Ete and founeert The

--- PAGE 115 ---
108 EASTER ISLAND

transition from childhood is not, at the present day, invested with
any ritual significance. It does not even coincide with the beginning
of sex life, which starts at a relatively tender age. Nowadays few
girls reach the critical age without having had some sexual experi-
ences with other children or even with adults, who, we were told,
have recourse to various methods of seduction or even to force. The
little boys are precocious and at an early stage imitate the frolics in
which they have seen their elders engaging. As far as we could
judge, parents take very little notice of these early sexual activities.
Among the Easter Islanders puberty is a purely physiological state,
unaccompanied by any emotional crisis or marked changes in the
mode of life.

The transition from childhood to adolescence may not have been
so imperceptible in the framework of the ancient civilization. Poly-
nesian societies did not normally surround the phenomenon of
puberty with a set of rites destined to initiate the adolescent in the
social and religious life of adults. For this reason I hesitate to inter-
pret as initiation rites the poki-manu (bird-child) ceremonies, of
which the natives retained a faint recollection twenty years ago.
Most of the information we received on this subject came from old
Viriamo—the oldest woman on the island—and is unfortunately in-
complete. The young boys had their heads shaved and had to pre-
sent an egg to a man called the tangata-tapu-manu. The children
went ab ig this man, who acted as their sponsor and mentor, to
Orongo, The ceremonies that took place at Orongo have been
almost entirely forgotten. They are said to have included dances in
front of the statues of Taurarenga, the reciting of sacred chants, and
the offering of fowls.

The ritual said to have been observed in the case of girls seems to
me a product of the lascivious imaginations of the present-day
islanders. One of the rocks at Orongo is covered with symbolic
drawings of the female sexual organs,/a very common motif in local
art. Our informants claimed that these drawings were cut in the
rock during the initiation of girls. Old Viriamo also told us of a
ceremony in which she had taken part at the time of her own
puberty: her mother stood beside her holding a fowl in each hand,
while a priest intoned a chant.

The lite of adolescents, as we have been able to glimpse it through

--- PAGE 116 ---
FROM BIRTH TO THE TOMB 109

folklore and the letters of missionaries, was one of complete idle-
ness. Little effort was demanded of them. No doubt they carried
out certain light tasks, but they passed long periods of leisure in the
hare-nui, buts built by some generous individual in preparation for
a family feast. Young men and girls gathered there to rehearse the
chants and dances they were to perform at forthcoming festivities.
These huts, which became reception halls on the feast-day, served
the youngsters as a sort of club-house, where they spent their
ar discussing their fellows, composing poems or making cat’s-
cradies.

These long periods of confinement in the hare-nui were also in-
tended to preserve the pale complexion which ranks so highly in the
Polynesian conception of ee Nobody would have liked to
appear at a dance with his skin blackened by the sun. Two ei
dary figures, Kaharoau and Kakoniau, were so ashamed of their
bronzed bodies that they dared not attend the feast to which all
the rest of the population had gone. But by immersing themselves
in the fountain called Vai-a-repa (‘The water of the handsome
young men’), they became so white that they were greeted with
murmurs of admiration and envy.

One particular cult of physical beauty may be observed in most
Polynesian societies. Young people do not shrink from any pro-
cedure, however unpleasant, that will enable them to acquire a fair
complexion and plenty of fat. On Mangareva wealthy families used
to shut their children up in huts or caves and force them, under
pain of a whipping, to over-eat. On feast-days the recluses who had
attained the desired weight showed themselves in all their splen-
dour, adorned with a belt and with a cloak of orange tapa cloth
about their shoulders.

The crowd thronged round to admire them, and shouts of
enthusiasm greeted the palest and most corpulent. These victims of
vanity were often so fat that they had to lean on friends in order not
to collapse under their own weight.

This custom possibly explains Easter Island traditions concerning
the neru. As I understood it, there used to be young men and girls
whom their parents confined in caves where they lived in total idle-
ness, so that their nails grew immensely long. They let their hair
grow and observed certain dietary tabus that must not, however, be

--- PAGE 117 ---
310 EASTER ISLAND

interpreted as fasting. Their parents took great pains to provide
them with food, but tradition does not refer to a fattening diet.
There is nothing in the surviving recollection of the zeru to suggest
that it was a custom dictated by religion; on the contrary, a few
allusions in a poem and a story stress the charms of these neru and
imply that their confinement increased their beauty. These analogies
with Mangareva perhaps justify us in interpreting the seclusion of
the neru as a purely aesthetic measure.

The following poem addressed to a recluse by a young man
makes this clear:

You are secluded, O recluse, in the cave.

Against the wall hangs the gourd filled with red ochre.
You have been secluded for a long time, O recluse.

I love you.

O you, who are a recluse,

How white you have grown in your retreat, O recluse!

The gourd hanging in the cave contained the colour with which
these girls painted themselves. The story of the ‘Talking Bananas’
describes de day of one of these beauties: in the morning her
mother washed ie deloused her, combed her hair, smeared her
with saffron, and pulled her clitoris to make it longer.

Adoption, a custom widespread in Oceania, was practised by the
Easter Islanders on a vast scale. The sway of this tradition is well
exemplified by the case of Victoria Rapahango who, having had
several children by a manager of the British Company, ‘gave’ one
of them to an old Italian with whom she was on friendly terms.
The rules governing this system of adoption have become obscure;
nowadays the children are generally confided to their godparents.
If the adoptive mother can suckle the child it is given to her imme-
diately after birth; otherwise the transfer takes place at the time of
weaning. No distinction is made between the adopted children and
the rest. They receive exactly the same affection as though they had
been born into the family. They bear the name of their new parents
and inherit from them. This fact often complicated our task when
we were trying to establish genealogies, since our informants
refused to make the slightest distinction between legitimate and
adopted sons. ‘We brought him up, so he’s our son,’ they told us

--- PAGE 118 ---
FROM BIRTH TO THE TOMB ili

when we tried to explain the difference. The parents deyote no
further thought to the child they have given away. They rarely see
it and show it no particular affection.

A child’s head, especially that of the eldest son, is still surrounded
by tabus. The mother takes care not to eat while holding her baby
in her lap. Victoria Rapahango, free as she was from most of the
ancient prejudices, shared this fear, One day, while in the fields, she
had inadvertently put some sweet potatoes in her little boy’s cap.
She was obliged to throw them away: through the agency of the
cap they had become contaminated with the mana of the child’s
head. A mother likewise cannot eat food that has come into contact
with her eldest son’s back or hand.

It is difficult to reconstruct the life of children as it was lived in
the ancient pagan society, There can be no doubt that it was more
varied and richer in training and activities than that of the modern
children.

During these early years the children, by imitating in games the
activities of their elders, familiarized themselves with the skills and
knowledge that would later enable them to play their part in the
life of the community. The boys went out with the fishing crews,
tried to cut and polish statues or stone tools, learned the
hymns and spells, and gained military skill in mock battles. The
girls carried babies, helped their mothers with domestic chores, and
os themselves by beating the mulberry bark or weaving little

askets.

Of all the’ aspects of a vanished culture, the most difficult to recon-
struct is everyday behaviour. Patient obseryation is required to
recreate the moral climate in which a society functioned. Too many
things have changed on Easter Island in the course of a century for
us confidently to deduce the past from the present. Traditional
morality has been affected by other rules borrowed from our moral
code, and the sanctions by which life was formerly governed have
disappeared. At most we can trace in the morals of today certain
general trends and attitudes inherited from. the ancient culture.
There can be no doubt, for example, that the sexual freedom still
prevails which made such an impression on the first yoyagers.
During the visits of Cook, La Pérouse, and Beechey, those who

--- PAGE 119 ---
riz EASTER ISLAND

landed on the island were the object of all sorts of attentions on the
pe of the women. The Easter Islanders were so anxious to see the
oreigners respond to the women’s advances that they made the
nature of their solicitations abundantly clear by unmistakable ges-
tures and pushed the young girls into the sailors’ arms. These
accounts have led to the belief that the ancient Easter Islanders were
almost totally indiscriminate in matters of sex—the expression
“sexual communism’ has been used in this connexion. One signifi-
cant fact has, however, been too frequently overlooked: the number
of women encountered by Europeans was always very small. In the
course of his stay on the island, Cook and his companions counted
only fifty or so, and other visitors saw even fewer. Various hypo-
theses have been advanced to explain this disproportion between the
sexes, but in all probability it was only apparent and the majority of
the women had hidden on the arrival of the strangers. The only
ones who remained on the beach were those who could profit by
their charms without injury to their rank and condition. This moral
liberty, which has so frequently been discussed, did not extend to
the whole feminine population. The women of the ariki class were
doubtless expected to behave with greater discretion. The recluses,
of whom we spoke above, were kept under very strict supervision.
There is a story in Easter Island folklore which relates the elope-
ment of a girl who had been seduced. The wrath and indignation of
the mother are so vividly described that it is easy to see that virginity
was not a matter of indifference. These few deus hint at limita-
tions to the moral laxity generally attributed to the ancient Easter
Islanders. r
The modern population of Hanga-roa can scarcely be called puri-
tanical. The Easter Islanders I knew accepted the capricious play of
the passions as somethin, perfectly normal, the subject at most for
a smile and some good-humoured gossip. In their opinion, every
normally constituted man had a right to a regular sex life, and pro-
longed continence aroused some surprise. The villagers did not fail
to attribute erotic adventures to every visitor to a island, even
those who, by virtue of their characters or functions, should have
been above suspicion.
No opprobrium attaches to unmarried mothers, of which there
are a great number in this society. They almost all end up by marry-

--- PAGE 120 ---
FROM BIRTH TO THE TOMB 113
ing, presenting their husbands with a progeny as abundant as it is
varied.

When a ship anchor in the Hanga-roa roadstead, the crew
are surrounded and cajoled by a group of women who offer them-
selves without the least shame for a few pieces of soap or a little
cloth. This soliciting on the beach is generally confined to poor
women. Well brought up girls of families in easy circumstances do
not readily give themselves to the first-comer. They arc not un-
appreciative of gifts, but demand a more discreet courtship. Few
girls make much fuss about their chastity, but there are pike
some who keep themselyes for lovers of their choice..In general,
the women show preference for the good dancers and gay com-
panions. These village Don Juans are sometimes unbearably
conceited.

It does not seem as though the different groups into which the
population of the island was subdivided practised exogamy. The
members of the aristocratic Miru tribe preferred to marry among
themselves, The only obstacle to iage was consanguinity, but
the interdiction did not go further than third cousins. Incest with a
prohibited cousin was apparently a serious crime, for legendary his-
tory cites the case of a war between two tribes provoked by a certain
Taropa who raped his cousin. He had courted her for a long time
unsuccessfully. One evening, finding her alone, he ravished her
despite her protests and despairing reminders of their family re-
lationship. The whole of the girl’s family took up arms and
acpaaltity dots bodice hunny OF the yoo aaa Rise giclee
sought the culprit everywhere. When he finally discovered him,
hiding in a cave, he drove a bone dagger into his throat and drank
the warm blood that flowed from the wound. He was not so much
avenging the outrage committed against his daughter as the defile-
ment of incest inflicted on his lineage.

The superstition of purity of blood, and also the desire to avoid
the dispersal of landed property, compelled the ariki and the
wealthy landowners to treat marriage as an instrument of policy.
As it was not always easy to find a bride or bridegroom answering
to.all the requirements, recourse was often had to unions between
children or between an adult and a child. Infant betrothal was so
common that it came to be regarded as an essential preliminary to

--- PAGE 121 ---
114 EASTER ISLAND

every marriage. A father, especially if he was a chief, chose for his
son a little girl who was destined to become his wife when she
reached puberty. The little fiancée lived with her future parents-in-
law, who brought her up as their daughter. When she was given
to her husband, the latter’s father said to him: ‘Do not strike her,
that her eyes may never be blackened by blows. Do not make her
suffer, except by giving her children.’ The son who refused the
fiancée chosen by his father risked the latter’s anger, for he had to
placate the parents of the rejected girl with a feast and gifts.

The opposite situation could also arise: an adolescent girl might
be promised to a small boy and have to wait for him to reach man-
hood. The marriage ceremony consisted essentially in exchanges of
food between the two families.

Polygamy was only practised by those sufficiently wealthy to sup-
port more than one wife. The missionaries complain in their
letters that the Easter Island kinglets hesitated to become Christians
because they did not want to abandon their wives. Today the
natives are astonished by the polygamy of their ancestors, which
they judge to be almost impossible because of the jealous and
quarrelsome nature of women. They explain this custom by assum-
ing that the husband kept his wives in different huts. This was
probably not the case, since old Viriamo, as a oung woman, used
to live under the same roof with the other wile

Polyandry may have existed de facto, if not de jure, during the
tragic period of the decline in the population, when there were
twice as many men as women. The only case of polyandry still
spoken of is that of the two brothers Hamae and Rae, who are said
to have shared the same wife for several years. This form of mar-
riage used to exist on the Marquesas, whence the Easter Islanders
originated. Was it continued on Easter Island? No answer can be
given to this question.

The women of Hanga-roa are generally well treated and enjoy
great influence. They never hesitate to express their opinions freely
during discussions, but they dare not oppose their husbands’ will
too openly. Tepano’s wife, Maria Ika, when her husband ordered
her to leave us, excused herself with the words, ‘I’m only a woman,
I have to obey.’

The domestic quarrels that I heard spoken of were all due cither

--- PAGE 122 ---
FROM BIRTH TO THE TOMB 115

to conjugal infidelity or to some trifling dispute. A few couples are
strongly united. We were told of one exceptional example of con-
jugal love: a young woman in perfect health, rather than leaye her
leprous husband, followed him to the leper colony, where she soon
contracted the terrible disease. Attachment between a man and a
woman to the point of death is the theme of the following anecdote:
There was, in the old days, a married couple famous for the good
terms on which they lived. During one of the periodic famines, the
young woman’s father came and fetched her because he had a store
of provisions at home. The husband was out looking for food.
When he returned and found his wife gone he imagined she had
left him; such was his grief that he shut himself up in his hut and
starved himself to death.

The division of labour between the sexes is equitable. The women
do not give the impression of being overworked. They do the house-
work and cooking, help to harvest the taros and yams, and fish or
gather shellfish on the shore. They weave baskets and formerly they
used to beat the mulberry bark to make tapa cloth. The rhythi of
their activities has undoubtedly remained the same throughout the
centuries. The missionaries whe commiserated with them on their
fate were blinded by prejudice. The only example they give of this
alleged servitude is especially badly chosen. They relate that a chief
was very indignant at being ordered to help his wife, who was
bending under an excessively heavy load. Anyone who knows how
sacred are the head and back of a Polynesian chief will understand
the full gravity of the insult represented by this demand. If the chief
had obeyed the missionary not only would his mana have been
irremediably destroyed, but this defilement might have had the
most serious consequences for himself and his family.

In many Eastern Polynesian societies men and women eat separ-
ately. This tabu may not have been observed on Easter Island, but
custom demanded that the men should be served first. The women
and children had to be content with the scraps left oyer.

Divorce was easy. It often had no other cause than a minor tiff or
a passing mood, and was effected without any formality. Christian-
ity has done nothing to strengthen the bonds of matrimony. A very
large number of individuals, although legally married, had settled
down with other women and had children by them; an official who,

--- PAGE 123 ---
116 EASTER ISLAND

in a moment of untimely zeal, tried to compel separated couples to
live together again, soon had to reverse his decision when he real-
ized that he was causing a vast change of partners that would have
thrown the whole village of Hanga-roa into confusion.

In olden times an adulterous woman was not punished by death
unless she was the wife of a nobleman. In the other social classes
she risked only repudiation or a beating. This, at any rate, was the
impression we gained from our conversations with the oldest of our
Sipanences but if the legends and stories reflect the morals of the
past, not every cuckelded husband was equally forbearing. They
sometimes took hideous revenge on their erring spouse, but in the
story we were told concerning one such case it was hard to say
whether the husband’s fury was due to his wife’s unfaithfulness or
to the insults she addressed to him.

The numerous cases of adultery that have occurred in recent years
have had no consequences other than divorce or a thrashing.

Such was the life cycle on Easter Island while it was still a closed
world. Now we have reached its end. The little Easter Islander
whose navel-cord was ceremonially cut has become a pleasure-lovin,
adolescent; he has married, he has cared for his family, and to

it he has tilled his country’s stony soil. He has known the terrors of
war and perhaps he was a matato‘a, a respected warrior. Now he is
dead. The medicine-men did not succeed in drawing out of his
body the demon that was tormenting it, and his soul has

If he was the head of a large family and if his name was pronounced
with respect, he may become first a benevolent demon and then a
god who, Bt ite call OF the piiest; will becese ican Be 6 ee
moments in the statucs on the mausoleums or in the wooden
images. His body will go to rest with his ancestors in the ahw that
he himself may have helped to build to please the tutelary deities
and outshine and humiliate neighbouring groups.

Only his bones will be placed in the open aiissof he cape
its mirabe that slopes down towards the village. First his flesh will
haye rotted away on a platform of wood or stone. Wrapped in a
mat and firmly tied with ropes, his corpse is exposed in front of the
ahu, where it will remain for two or three years. His soul, roaming
in the vicinity, can hear the laments of hired mourners, men and

--- PAGE 124 ---
FROM BIRTH TO THE TOMB 117

women, who are celebrating the virtues of the deceased and averting
his anger by singing his praises:

Alas, alas, what will become of us?

Alas for us, father, O father who brought much food,

Many fish, many yams, many sweet potatoes,

Many eels, much sugar cane, many bananas,

O father who did not go begging to the houses of others.

Now you are lost to us.

O father, great fisherman, your taut line sung.

Alas, alas, what will become of us?

While these lamentations are ringing out, a vague sense of fear
descends on the assembly. The men squat on the ground discussing
the event in low voices. They mention the tabus the deceased may
possibly have violated and which may have caused his death. Uncles
and cousins bustle about round the oven in which they will cook
the food provided for the multitude of guests. The funeral meal is
governed by very detailed rules. The close relatives of the deceased
prepare the umu papaku, the ‘dead man’s oven’. The ‘master of
the corpse’, that is to say, the dead man’s nearest relative—his son
or father—cannot touch this food himself, but he distributes it to
the guests. The more distant relatives, or even neighbours, cook
anal ovenfuls of food—the umu rikiriki—which represent their
share in the mourning. The ‘master of the corpse’ must abstain
from these too. His meal is cooked separately with stones that have
not been used in the other ovens: if he omitted to take this pre-
caution he would die in the course of the year. The funeral rites,
still observed on the island, demand that the ‘master of the corpse’
makes a symbolic gift of the tomb to his neighbours before inviting
them to ts banquet.

As stomachs become filled melancholy is dissipated. The guests
feel fortified and enlivened by the good food and good company.
Conversation grows asian and soon the monotonous lamenta-
tions are succeeded by songs and dances. A man or woman rises
and performs a few dance steps. People crowd round to watch, and
the visitors or distant relatives begin to move their arms and legs to
the rhythm of songs that are now slow and plaintive, now fast and
violent.

--- PAGE 125 ---
118 EASTER ISLAND

The place where the corpse had been left to rot, and the adjoining

sea-front, used to be placed under a tabu that was indicated be
heap of whitened stones or a few sugar-canes tied in a bundle. No
fire could be lit in the proximity of the dead man. That is why
Gonzalez’s sailors were asked not to smoke near the great statues.
Fishing was strictly forbidden in the waters off the section of coast
on which the mausolcum stood. No insult was so deeply felt as a
breach, even if involuntary, of these tabus. Death was the only
possible punishment for such an affront.
_ At any time when mortality on the island was high, the coast
was lined with stretchers bearing decomposing corpses waiting for
the moment when their whitened bones would be transferred to the
family mausoleum.

The souls of the dead, it was believed, wandered about nearby
and food from the living. If they were not kept by any
desire for revenge, and if the funeral rites had been performed
according to custom, ss gaa made their way to the western-
most extremity of the island and from there flew towards the Po
(the Night), whence their ancestors had come in boats to meet
them, and where their children would later join them. The dead
retained their social rank and continued to live in the world of the
shades the life they had been used to on carth.

The bones of the dead, or their dried bodies, were deposited in a
vault constructed within the ahw. These sanctuaries were the
island's commonest and most characteristic monuments, and also,
when they were surmounted by the giant statues, the most imposing.
They occur at short intervals all the way along the coast. Some con-
sist only of large, semi-pyramidal cairns; others resembled caissons
constructed of neatly fitting blocks (aku-avanga); others again are
elongated in form and represent ships with curved, raised ends to
suggest the bow and stern (ahu-poepoe).

The Te-Peu ahu, one of the best preserved, will give us an idea
of the general appearance of these mausoleums. Imagine first a
parapet or bastion—the military term springs to mind ae moment
one at this cyclopean wall with its salient and it ramp, on
which reposed the village dead. What has wrongly been designated
the ‘facade’ of the ahw is actually the rear of the monument: a wall
about seven feet high, whose masonry of unmortared stones is con-

--- PAGE 126 ---
FROM BIRTH TO THE TOMB 119

cealed behind huge slabs of basalt dressed in such a way that they
fit together with the precision of a dovetail joint. The statues, which
came from the Rano-raraku quarry—to be described later—used to
stand on a platform about a yard and a half across at the top of the
parapet. Today they lie flat on the ground, their faces buried in the
soil or broken against the stones.

The position of the statues, all of which had their backs to the
sea, was long considered a ‘mystery’. The explanation is simple,
however. The mausoleums were all built along the shore, or, like
Te-Peu ahu, at the top of a cliff. Their statues were the objects of a
cult and formed part of a religious edifice: they naturally faced the
worshippers and not the waves.

In olden days the statues were approached up a ramp consisting
of a huge mound of lava blocks and large boulders. It was in this
heap of stones that the vaults containing the skeletons were placed.
Five of these are visible in the Te-Peu ahu, and there are others
hidden by the rubble. This sloping pile of stones held in place by a
retaining wall of slabs set on ye is prolonged at ground level by a
paved space. The main body of the mausoleum was flanked on
either side by slanting wings.

Some twenty yards behind the ahz there used to rise a rectangu-
lar structure, the remains of which consist of an accumulation of
stones and earth held in position by slabs set in the ground. It was
on this terrace that the corpse was exposed.

The mausoleums were also the sanctuaries on which offerings
were made to the gods and to which the ancestors were reputed to
return in order to protect their descendants and preserve them from
danger. The ah were to Easter Island what the marae were to the
Society Islands or the Tuamotu, and the mea‘e to the Marquesas.

--- PAGE 127 ---
/
CHAPTER VII

Religion and Magic

Major gods—Creation chants—The bird-man cult—Tabus—
Sorcery

Menony oF the great Polynesian gods only survives in incomplete
myths and vague traditions almost unintelligible to the new genera-
tions. The names of the most celebrated deities—Rongo, Tiki,
Maui—awaken no echo in the recollection of present-day Easter
Islanders. This oblivion is not due solely to the island’s Christianiza-
tion. As early as the mid-nineteenth century, the missionaries speak
of this singular falling-off in the pagan cults. They congratulate
themselves on it at the same time as they express surprise at the
natives’ indifference. Brother Eyraud declares in one of his letters
that he has never observed any outward manifestation of religious
sentiment. He is exaggerating, as other passages in his reports
show; but it is none x ft true that Christianity met little or no
resistance. It is difficult to escape the impression that even before
the evangelization of the island the rites, the sacred chants and the
legends of the gods—which, in Central Polynesia, are held in such
profound veneration—had lost their prestige, and that the major
themes of the ancient cosmogony were already half forgotten.

The minor dieties, the mischievous and familiar spirits, have
resisted Christianity and time better than the majestic ‘Lords of
Space’ of the classical pantheon. As in the past, they haunt the
solitary shores of the island and trouble the sleep of its inhabitants.
In vain the church bell rings morning and evening, in vain the
crosses stand at the parting of the ways—fear of the ancestral spirits
is as much alive as ever. People do not like to speak of them at the
hour when they are reputed to glide by the dwellings of the living,
but in broad daylight the Easter Islanders have no hesitation in
complaining of their spiteful tricks. Any expression of doubt as to
the existence of these nocturnal visitors unleashed vigorous protests
on the part of the many individuals who had a bone to pick with
them and swore to having seen them with their own eyes.

120

--- PAGE 128 ---
RELIGION AND MAGIC m1

The most dreaded spirits are those that appear in the hideous
guise of half putrefied corpses—the nostrils drawn down, ribs pro-
truding beneath dried skin, the belly emptied of its entrails and
looking as though it were threatened by the hooked breast-bone.
The artists of the pre-Christian era were inspired by these horrific
visions to carve the little wooden images, the moai kavakava, that
are among the finest creations of Easter Island art and authentic
masterpieces of primitive statuary.

The conventional picture a society draws of the supernatural
world inevitably impresses itself on the subconscious of its indi-
vidual members and colours their dreams and hallucinations. Thus,
a few days before we left, a young girl told us she had seen her
grandfather in a nightmare. When he turned to smile at her, she
noticed that his ribs were showing and that in the hollow of his
belly his bowels were seething with worms. This dream, inspired by
the conventional descriptions of ghosts, was interpreted by the
young woman as an augury of misfortune, Her terror was pitiful.

Nowadays all supernatural beings are called indifferenly akuaku
or tatane—the latter expression being derived from our ‘Satan’,
fact, however, the emaciated ghosts and the benevolent spirits that
help mankind belong to separate categories,

The folklore abounds in stories of fatane. They are often beauti-
ful girls or valiant young men, who have nothing in common with
the terrifying spectres ibed above. But even the dead are not
necessarily to be feared as harmful. In former times some of them
became the benefactors of their families and overwhelmed them
with gifts. They took advantage of the powers conferred upon them
by their spirit state to send their children turtles or driftwood. On
this subject the following legend is told:

An old man named Rano, knowing that he was dying, said to
his son: ‘Eight days after my death you will observe a tree with
its roots Fe branches floating in from the sea.’ He died shortly
afterwards, His son buried him in an aha, lit an oven and gave
a splendid funeral banquet.

On the eighth day he went to the Ana-Havea cave, where he
saw a tree with large branches washed up on the beach. Some
men were in the process of chopping it up. The young man cried

--- PAGE 129 ---
122 EASTER ISLAND

to them, ‘Men, leave my tree.’ But they replied, ‘Here's your tree,
little boy; take it,’ and they made an obscene gesture.

The boy returned home. He took a white chicken and went
back to Ana-havea. He waved the fowl and cried, ‘My father,
stand up.’ The tree began to move and finally stood upright. The
men ats had taken possession of the tree said, *Child, don’t do
that, leave the tree alone.’ But the boy did not listen to them. He
cried once more, ‘O my father, stand up and go away.’

The tree was soon floating out to sea again. The young man’s
relatives came and implored him, ‘Call back the tee for us, your
relatives.’ The young man said, ‘All right, I will,’ and the float.
ing tree came back and was washed ashore. This time it stayed
and the relatives cut it up to make statuettes, ao (dance paddles),
pendants, paddles and cudgels,

Ivis, therefore, difficult to distinguish between spirits of the dead,
demons, and lesser gods. Were the spirits that watched over a
family or an individual deified et or demons eet to the

‘cat divinities of the pantheon? scar ius 0! Ra
Fens family was a pe of the same name. al his comnacen
Tare, watched over the whole of the Tupahotu tribe. These two
deities carried their benevolence to the point of hiding food from
the neighbouring groups in order to give it to their protégés. In
return, the Tupahotu invited them to their meals. No one touched
the dishes until the head of the family had thrown a morsel over
his shoulder, pronouncing as he did so the following formula:
“What I am giving is for the auaku Rapahango, who comes from
beyond the seas.’ Some say that the spirits contented themselves
with the essence of the food, but others are convinced that they
require a more substantial dict.

amiliar spirits were willing to talk with those who gained
their confidence. et pected the future, warned them of immi-
nent dangers, and tol many scerets. Tepano’s old mother had
been in the habit of conversing toe hours on end with two tatane.
Our friend had not forgotten the high-pitched, piercing voices of
these visitors and imitated them for our amusement. He had never
had the courage to look at them, however—a fact on which he
congratulated himself. Spirits do not like to be secn, and when

--- PAGE 130 ---
RELIGION AND MAGIC 123

in are present in a hut anyone who enters has to crawl in
“e sae hillock had dian demo:
very district, every bay, every hillock ha its guardi n or
familiar genius. The lists u¢ Gane on akeetkee dicated by the natives
contain about a hundred names, and they are far from exhaustive.

The spirits that figure in myths and stories are often so human in
character that their true nature may be overlooked. They marry,
have children, suffer and dic like human beings. Their supernatural
power only manifests itself in the speed with which they can trans
port themselves from one place to another.

irits have animal shapes or are the personification of
natural phenomena or objects. Then they bear names like ‘Land-
slide’, ‘Rain with Heavy Drops’, or “Big House with Stone Foun-
dations’.

The ancient Easter Islanders ascribe important discoveries to
these demons or minor gods. Thus the two female demons ‘Lizard
Woman’ and ‘Gannet Woman’ are said to have taught them to
prepare pua, the dye extracted from turmeric (Curcuma longa).
The first bone fish-hooks were made by Ure, a strange and vision-
sy Seen tna are dlp pir Gg technical

vances. One legend tells how a bird spirit brought a farmer a
new varicty of yam. The beneficent actions of demons are a fre-
quent theme of myths and legends,

In addition to ‘ese benevolent demons there were mischievous
and murderous ones. At the dawn of time thirty demons, who were
terrorizing the island's inhabitants, were destroyed by the hero Ra-
cae i ia val mi fit of
maacness,

The beliefs and practices discussed in the preceding section are the
scattered vestiges of a popular religion that was accessible to all, and
hence has been slow in disappearing. They contain pointers—unfor-
tunately few and far between—to much more refined religious ob-
servances and a more complex cult. It would have been surprising if
the ancient Easter Islanders had not preserved, or even enriched,
the heritage of myths and rites that had come to them from their
Eastern Polynesian ancestors.

The Polynesian pantheon comprises three categories of super-

--- PAGE 131 ---
124 EASTER ISLAND

natural beings: the great uncreated gods and their sons; local gods
and deified ancestors; and finally the anonymous host of good and
evil spirits.

No Polynesian god enjoyed a prestige equal to that of Tangaroa,
the god of the sea. In the Society Islands and Samoa he was con-
sidered the greatest of all the divine personages and the creator of
the world. The ancient Easter Islanders had certainly not forgotten
him. In fact his name appears in the list of kings, and one ahu—on
a desolate headland on the south coast—bears his name in conjunc
tion with those of Papa, the Earth, and Hiro,

Simon Riroroko, a native belonging to the Miru lincage, dictated
to me a strange myth that may refer to the ancient sea god:

The king Tangaroa-mea said: ‘I shall enter the water like a
seal and go to a country where I shall be king.’ The king, his
brother, said ‘You will die, it isa distant country, you cannot go
quickly. I can go there and return the same day.’

They quarrelled. Victory was Tangaroa’s and he went to
Easter Island. His mana was over the sea, in which he was like a
seal. The mana of his brother was over the land.

He landed at Tonga-riki, and he was seen by the people. The
clamour resounded: * cople of the land, a seal has landed at
Tonga-riki.’ People said: *He has seal’s feet, seal’s hands, but a
man's face.” wanted to kill him. The king Tangaroa said:
“Lam the king Tangaroa. I am not a seal. The people said: ‘No,
he is a seal with a voice.’

They assaulted him with stones. They shouted: ‘Haul him to
the shore.’ They carried him to Pito-kura. They dug out an oven,
put Tangaroa inside, and closed it with stones, Later they opened
a oven, but the sere was still raw. They oe the oven again

stayed waiting. They o the oven again, and
the tol hee not cooked. _ a on

The people said: “It was true, he was really a king, he was
Tangaroa and not a seal. Therefore he is raw.’

The brother of Tangaroa, Teko-of-the-long-feet, saw that his
brother did not come back in one month. This king of a forei
country cried for his brother. He went to search for him.
landed on the islet. He put his foot at Retu (near Vai-tea). He

--- PAGE 132 ---
OULD[OA TYLIW-OURY AY JO MOT A


--- PAGE 133 ---
Beating tapa cloth

--- PAGE 134 ---
Viriamo, who was born about 1845, before the coming of the French
missionaries

Juan Tepano, our informant, carving a wooden image

--- PAGE 135 ---
Playing cat’s cradle

--- PAGE 136 ---
sBury Jo wepusssop ‘ofuvyedey voit,


--- PAGE 137 ---
osvuit TO}SODUY UB jo proy ay.

ADIA yuq ‘aSvutt JOjsoOUYy
E q Tt V


--- PAGE 138 ---
Portion of the tablet Aruku-kurenga (Museum of the Congregation of
the Sacrés Carurs du Picpus, Braine-le-Comte, Belgium)


--- PAGE 139 ---
Two views of a female ancestor image

--- PAGE 140 ---
Stone starues on the slopes of Rano-raraku


--- PAGE 141 ---
Unfinished statue

--- PAGE 142 ---
Head of fallen statue, crowning the Ahu Tonga-riki

Stone ‘hat’, lying near statue on which it once stood
> tying

--- PAGE 143 ---
Seaward facade of Ahu Tepen, showing curbstones from house
foundations

Fallen statues on an aba of the south coast

--- PAGE 144 ---
Seaward facade of Ahu Vinapu, built of dressed slabs

Another view of the facade of Ahu Vinapu

--- PAGE 145 ---
Statue on the slopes of Rano-raraku

--- PAGE 146 ---
RELIGION AND MAGIC 125

was looking for his brother. ‘Where is Tangaroa, the king?’ he
asked at Ranokao, again at Retu, and at Pui. The men of the
land were afraid. He lifted his foot again at Puku-puhipuhi, the
place Where-Teko-planted-his-digging-stick. He again lifted his
foot beyond Poike. He asked again, “Where is Tangaroa, the
king?’ He asked for the last time for the king, Tangaroa. He
turned back, he disappeared to the foreign country. His feet
trampled on the earth, but his head reached the sky. He was
always asking about Tangaroa, the king.

Hiro, the great navigator of Polynesian myths, was the god of
rain on Easter Island, as this fragment of a hymn for rain shows:

O rain, long tears of Hiro,
Fall,

Strike the ground,

O rain, long tears of Hiro.

On the northern coast, near the Mahatua ghz, there is a stone
pierced by a natural hole called by the natives “Hiro’s Trumpet’.
The north ‘wind is said to draw from it a dull, melancholy sound
like that produced by a conch shell. An aura of superstitious respect
surrounds this rock, which is covered with innumerable symbolic
representations of the female sexual organs. In olden days it was
credited with the property of causing clouds of flying fish to leap on
to the strand every time it was shaken.

As to the other great gods of the Polynesian pantheon—Rongo,
Ruanuku, Atua-metua (God the Parent}—they are little more than
names appearing in the royal genealogies and in a creation chant
that will be discussed later.

One of our expedition’s surprises was the discovery of numerous
petroglyphs representing a mask with large eyes, identified by the
natives as the god Makemake.

The god’s face shows an astonishing likeness to that of Tiki,
which is one of the most characteristic motifs of the art of the Mar-
quesas. The shape of the Marquesan Tiki has been interpreted as
portraying a skull, and the same probably applies to the symbol of
the god Makemake, as the following myth suggests:

There was a priestess watching over a skull on a rock in the
Ez


--- PAGE 147 ---
126 EASTER ISLAND

bay of Tonga-riki. One day a big wave came and swept this skull
out to sea. The priestess leapt into the water to recover it. The
skull floated rapidly away on the water and she swam after it to
get it back. After swimming for several days, she landed on the
island of Matiro-hiva. Then the god Haua appeared to her and
asked: “Where do you come from?’ ‘I am looking for my skull,’
she replied. Haua said: ‘It is not a skull, but the god Makemake.’

The priestess stayed on the island with Makemake and Haua.
The gods brought her the fish they caught. One day Makemake
said to the god Haua: ‘What would you say to our driving the
birds to Easter Island? For that purpose I came here.’ Haua
answered: ‘It is good, tell the old priestess to prepare herself and
we will leave for Easter Island. There she shall reveal our names
to the inhabitants and teach them the rites with which they must
worship us.”

So the two gods showed the priestess the rituals they wished
her to teach the inhabitants of the island.

Then Makemake said to Haua: ‘Now we must go.” They set
out, driving the birds in front of them, in search of a place where
they could leave them to nest. They stopped for three years at
Hauhanga with their birds; but the spot was badly chosen, for
men discovered the eggs and ate them. Then they brought the
birds to Vaiatare, but here again the inhabitants came and took
the eggs and ate them. Finally Makemake and Haua said to one
another: ‘We shall have no peace until we find a place where men
cannot reach us.’ So they established their birds on the islets of
Motu-nui and Motw-iti.

During this time the priestess was travelling about Easter Island
initiating its inhabitants in the cult of the gods Makemake and
Haua. She said to them: ‘Before begi ing a meal, when you
take food out of the oven, set aside Peigattion of the gods and
make them an offering of it, pronouncing these words: “Make-
make and Haua, this is for you!” Do the same when you are
about to eat sugar-canes, fish, tunny, and eels. Never forget the
portion of the gods.’

In addition to being symbolized by a skull, Makemake was also
Tepresented as a man with the head of a bird, the famous ‘bird-

--- PAGE 148 ---
RELIGION AND MAGIC 127

man’ of Easter Island art. It was in his capacity as of the
‘denizens of the air’, as the guardian of the birds on the islets of
Motu-nui and Motu-iti, that Makemake was worshipped during the
annual festivals of the bird-man.

The name Makemake undoubtedly conceals the old New
Zealand deity Tane, the god of forests and the friend of birds. Like
Tane and Tiki, Makemake embodies the fecundating forces of
nature. He is the creator of mankind, despite the difficulties he
encountered in this task.

*Makemake found a calabash full of water. He masturbated and
his semen spurted into the water. Flesh appeared on the water. But
it was no good. He copulated with stones, which still show the
holes the god made in them. He thrust his member into clay and
masturbated. From this were born Tive, Rorai, Hova and the
noblewoman Arangi-kote-kote.’

These successive copulations are one of the most famous themes
of Polynesian mythology. When Tane or Tiki wish to procreate
human beings they mate with all sorts of queer objects, to the great
delight of the story-teller’s audience, who are highly amused by the
gods’ simple-mindedness.

Makemake was probably the most important god in the Easter
Island religion. He was the only one of whom the missionaries
heard when they enquired about the pagan deities. He was the
supreme atua and the Creator of the Universe. The Makemake cult
has, however, left few traces in the island’s traditions. Only the
feast of the bird-man, which was held in his honour, can still be
reconstructed in its broad outline. The disappearance of a lar
proportion of the priesthood during the slave-raid of 1862 would
explain this sharp break in religious tradition and forgetfulness of
the ancient cults.

Makemake, Haua and the other gods received offerings of fowls,
fish, sweet potatoes and pieces of tapa cloth. These gifts were
handed to the priests, who undertook to convey them to the deity.
The god Makemake demanded human flesh. Children stolen by the
priests from their parents were sacrificed to him, as well as prisoners
of war and people who had incurred the wrath of the ariki. The
first French missionaries relate that at the beginning of their stay on
the island women came and thanked them for saving the lives of

--- PAGE 149 ---
128 EASTER ISLAND

their children, who, without their intervention, would have been
sacrificed to the god.

The prisoners destined for these thanksgiving sacrifices were shut
up in a hut facing the aku belonging to the family of their captor.
Their bodies were devoured at a feast that followed the religious
ceremony. The English voyager Palmer, who visited the island in
1867, describes cylinders of red tufa that he took to be the altars on
which the victims were placed and on which their ashes were pre-
served. We did, in fact, find some cylinders .corresponding to
Palmer’s description behind the south-coast aku. But they seem to
have been pillars on which corpses were left to decompose.

A few old people still remember the rites formerly carried out to
induce rainfall. This ceremony was performed on the iniative of
the ariki-mau, who sent a high-ranking priest—generally a member
of his own family—to undertake this magical operation. The rain-
maker, his face painted half black and half red, went to the top of a
hill, where he buried a piece of coral that was still wet and covered
in seaweed. He then addressed a prayer to the god Hiro, begging
him to shed tears on the thirsty earth. Sure of the result, he awaited
the downpour; as soon as it came, he ran across country to oblige
the clouds to follow him and discharge their waters on the terri-
tories of all the tribes.

Polynesians were profoundly imbued with the aristocratic spirit.
Everyone’s rank depended on the purity of his blood and the num-
ber of his known ancestors. Such an attitude produced an almost
morbid interest in genealogies. No feast was celebrated without the
recitation of the complete list of ancestors of all the chiefs present.
In salutations between ariki it was obligatory on each party to
enumerate the other’s forbears.

The value attached to genealogies infected religion and literature.
The gods themselves were provided with a pedigree and presented
as the fruit of a long series of unions between imaginary beings. This
mania even extended to nature: minerals, plants and animals, in
their turn, were credited with parents. It would be puerile to look
upon these sacred genealogies as lists of deities. These couples are
pure abstractions or imaginary objects chosen more or less at ran-
dom because of the consonance of their names. There is nothing

--- PAGE 150 ---
RELIGION AND MAGIC 129

here but empty verbiage, with no other significance than a desire to
honour the gods in the manner of the ariki.

By a fortunate chance one of these genealogical chants explaining
the origin of gods and natural objects was taken down from the
mouth of old Ure-vaeiko by the American traveller Thomson. It
was dictated to him as the text of one of the tablets. Thomson’s
version has reached us so mutilated by errors of transcription and
printing that it is almost unintelligible. My efforts to re-establish its
original form were not entirely successful, but it was possible to
translate fragments so that the general character of the hymn is in
no doubt. Alongside paweiniek seen we find references to
some of the great mythical personages of Eastern Polynesia—the
Lord Tiki and his wife Hina, who was moulded from clay, for
example. This religious text tells us nothing about the island’s past,
except that its oral literature drew inspiration from themes common
to many Polynesian cultures.

God-of-the-angry-look by copulating with Roundness produced
the poporo [ Solanum nigrum |.

Himahima-marao by copulating with Lichen-growing-on-the-soil
produced the lichen.

Ti by copulating with Tattooing produced the # plant.

Elevation by copulating with Altitude produced the inland-grass.

Sharpness by copulating with Adze produced obsidian.

Twining by copulating with Beautiful-face-with-penetrating-
tongue produced the morning-glory plant.

Parent-god by copulating with Angry-eel produced the coconut.*

Grove by copulating with Trunk produced the ashwood tree
[Sapindus saponaria].

Dragonfly by copulating with Bug-that-flies-on-the-water pro-
duced the dragonfly.

Stinging-fly by copulating with Swarm-of-flies produced the fly.

Branch by copulating with Fork-of-a-tree produced the beetle-
living-in-rotten-wood.

1 Ti is here regarded as a deity who produced the plant of the same name.
The ashes of # provided a pigment used in tattooing.

2 An allusion to the eel whose head, thrust into the ground, produced
the coconut palm.

--- PAGE 151 ---
130 EASTER ISLAND
The Lizard Woman by copulating with Whiteness produced the

gannet.
Hard-soil by copulating with Layer-of-earth produced the sugar-
cane.

Acridness by copulating with Bad-taste produced the arum.*

Killing by copulating with Flat-one-of-the-white-tail [ the sting-
ray| produced the shark.

Tiki-the-lord by copulating with Stone produced burning-red-
meat.*

Small-thing by copulating with Imperceptible-thing produced the
fine dust in the air.

Tiki-the-lord by copulating with the Woman-of-sand produced
Hauhara.

The island’s greatest religious festival, the only one concerning
which circumstantial details survive, was that of the bird-man, inti-
mately linked with the cult of the god Makemake. The long mystic
drama enacted every year on the Orongo cliffs was not only of great
religious significance, but also profoundly affected the island’s
social life.

The aim of these rites, which were repeated every year and gave
tise on every occasion to the most violent passions, was the discovery
and possession of the first egg laid by the manu-tara (Sterna hirun-
do), the sooty tern, on the islet of Motu-nui. This purpose may
seem out of proportion to the sum total of the effort expended to
attain it and the risks taken’ by those who coveted this meagre
booty. But only those ignorant of the power of symbols can smile
at such endeavours. The egg was the incarnation of the god Make-
make and the tangible expression of religious and social forces of
great intensity. The stake in this struggle for the possession of an
gg was nothing less than divine favour and the sanction of political

wer.

PeThe ceremonies leading up to the proclamation of the bird-man
can only be understood within this framework.

* The arum is a species of taro that is extremely bitter when insufficiently
cooked.

* An allusion to the Polynesian myth in which Tiki copulates with
various objects before creating the first woman,

--- PAGE 152 ---
RELIGION AND MAGIC 135

The two centres of the cult were Orongo and the islet of Motu-
nui. The village of Orongo, which was occupied by pilgrims during
the festival of t the bird-man, stands on the crest of the Rano-kao
volcano, on top of a cliff that separates the bottom of the crater from
the ocean. This thin wall is the last remnant of the southern slope
of the volcano, the rest of which has been worn away by the waves.
If any of it caves in, the waters of the lake will pour out into the
and the former crater will become a cove encircled by steep
slopes.

The ruins of the houses are covered over by grass and would be
unnoticeable but for their low, narrow doors. These buildings used
to rise in several tiers on the lip of the crater, coming to a stop at a
group of basalt blocks on which there were sculptured images of
the bird-man. These rocks rose at the extremity of a narrow ridge
looking out over the reed-filled lake and the foam-fringed islets of
Motw-iti and Motu-nui.

The houses of Orongo, forty-six in number, were built of schis-
tous slabs modelled after the thatched huts which the worshippers
had originally erected, but which had been blown away by the
wind. Artists have covered the slabs retaining the wall-fillings with
paintings representing Makemake—the god with the big eyes—
sacred objects, such as dance paddles, and European ships. The
majority of these frescoes have been removed by the crews of the
German vessel ‘Hyaena’ and the American ‘Mohican’, who did
not hesitate to destroy the houses of which they formed part. The
reat statue that stands today beneath the portico of the British
Museum also comes from the village of Orongo.

The results of excavations carried out by Mrs Routledge in the
pi huts were disappointing. The best find was an anthropo-
morphic pillar that decorated the entrance to one of the narrow
passages leading to these dwellings. The niches in the interior walls
were empty, as were the paved pits in front of the doors. These
were doubtless umu or earth ovens in which the pilgrims cooked
their food.

On the other hand, the detailed study of the petroglyphs under-
taken by the Routledge an anes and by our own aealy demon-
strated the importance of the bird-man symbol, which is portrayed
no less than 150 times, very often with an egg in its hand. Some

--- PAGE 153 ---
132 EASTER ISLAND

rocks bear very realistic representations of the frigate bird. The
aesthetic value of these sculptures varies greatly. Some of them have
been carved by the hand of a master with great purity of style;
others, on the contrary, are clumsy and crude. There is no ost
arrangement in the way these petroglyphs are grouped and it

be Be seck any salir plan, The are the amet of isolated
efforts on the part of gencrations of 2 eo worshippers, who, by
this pious labour, sought either to win the favour of the bird god or
to thank him for his aid after victory.

The choice of Orongo as the centre of the bird-man cult was due
to its proximity to the islets of Motu-nui, Motu-iti, and Motu-kao-
kao, which have always been refuges of sea birds. They hardly ever
leave this vicinity and are rarely found in other parts of the island.
As Makemake and Haua had nee they are seldom disturbed by
men in search of eggs. Motu-kaokao, covered in guano, shoots up
like a white needle amidst the waves. The two other islets are
accessible, but to land on them requires a calm sea and some agility.
They are both covered with tall, straight grasses, some species of
which beens to the ancient flora that has now disappeared from
‘the main island. This vegetation conceals the entrances to sub-
terranean os ace clay marge be been decorated bi
engravings. represents profile of a bird,
Wika: open teak streamed kad of cibbon that seems to symbolize

its cry.

koi sue vised ic Ikeee he capone escent Ge duces a
Be hae Saved ss sielesst fox tis bntese ob ete
¢ e chambers presented a spectacle worthy of the atmo-
Giee cfEaiec lita. Tix dittane: weceaoe on steep, so that
only a dim light could penctrate the cave. When our cyes grew
accustomed to the darkness, we distinguished on a platform a
skeleton still wrapped in its rush mat. Above the dead man, as
though watching over him, an enormous head painted in red stared
at him with its great round orbits. In the soft clay covering the wall
were drawn a dance paddle and a two-headed bird, partially effaced.
Mrs Routledge states that she found in this grotto four other
skeletons, which have since vanished.

‘These are the various décors against which the drama of the bird-
man was enacted every year. The first phase in this cycle of festivi-

--- PAGE 154 ---
RELIGION AND MAGIC 133

ties comprised a halt at Mataveri, at the foot of Rano-kao volcano,
where two or three large huts stood—in roughly the position now
occupied by the buildings of the British Company. These huts were
only occupicd at the time of the bird-man feast. The pilgrims
srpat there to rehearse their dances and prepare the ornaments
accessories used during the ceremonies. Revelry and cannibal
feasts are also associated with this initial period in the recollection
of the t-day natives, but it is possible that our informants
i fo tinted meas on the way to Orongo the colours and
details properly belonging to the apogce of these festivities, when
the trium| the bird-man was celebrated at the same spot.
The pilgrims went up to Orongo in July, Their faces painted
black and red, with diadems of feathers on their heads and bran-

Aspirants to the title and rank of bird-man entrusted the task of
finding the first manu-tara egg to servants, the hopu, who were sent
to the islet of Motu-nui to watch the birds. This task was dangerous
and onerous. The team of bird-nesters had first to swim across the
shark-infested arm of the sea separating the Rano-kao cliff from the

5?

--- PAGE 155 ---
134 EASTER ISLAND

three islets, To scramble ashore on these islands amidst the reefs
and breakers that protect them was a feat which can hardly be
contemplated without shuddering. To make this crossing, the
employed conical floats made of rushes, inside which placed
the provisions they took with them in anticipation of a long stay.
The anguish of the swimmers was expressed in a long semi-magical
invocation, the text of which is unfortunately lost, The gods
occasionally took the trouble to warn some pricst of the dan
threatening the Aopu. Those matato‘a who, atthe h warned of hi
danger, still exposed their servant to the risk of death, may be
reproached with a certain callousness. As a precaution, they sent a
second servant to take the place of the one who was going to be
devoured by sharks.

The Aopu lodged in the grottoes described above, They spent
their days watching the movements of the manu-tara, in the hope
of seizing the first egg laid. During these weeks of waiting, they
were ‘sometimes entirely cut off from the main island by stormy
weather. Foresecing this possibility, they carefully preserved the
skins of their bananas and potatoes and dried them in the sun, to
be eaten if they were subsequently short of food, If the sea was
calm their revictualling was taken care of by their relatives or
snag who sent other servants with provisions wrapped in rush

ts,

The tribes established at Orongo were meanwhile extremely
active. The servants on the island were only the blind instruments
of the god. Their quest was vain if their fand and eye were not
ini by Makemake. If Makemake did not wish a matato‘a to

me a bird-man, his servant would not see the first egg even if
he touched it with his foot. Success depended on the zeal shown by
the candidates and their families in winning divine favour. They
set to with a will.

The village hummed night and day with the rhythmic chanti
of the tangata-rongorongo. Food offerings were brought to the

» his companion Haua, and even to the priestess who
disseminated his cult. Prayers were also addressed to Vie-Kana, a
bird god who lived at Mataveri.

Our informant had these details from his uncle Rue, who was
one of the last bird-men. While telling me of the activities of the

--- PAGE 156 ---
RELIGION AND MAGIC 135

ilgrims, Tepano suddenly uttered a series of piercing cries or yel
Ls ared ssuied us aan a faithful Sinden of oe voices of es
gods when they took possession of the priests. These contacts be-
tween man and god were made in the darkness of the stone houses,
from which the inhabitants had been temporarily ejected. Offerings
to the gods were accompanied by the formula which they them-
selves had revealed to men; ‘Ka to‘o ma Haua, ma Makemake ...’

At the beginning of September the hops on the island of Motu-
nui redoubled their vigilance. They scarcely slept and never took
their eyes off the flight of the manu-tara. Suddenly one of them
found in the grass a speckled egg. He forthwith leapt on to a rock
called the Rangi-te-manu, the ‘Cry of the bird’, and shouted at the
is of his voice: ‘So-and-so, (the name of his master) shave your

ead!”

This of triumph was heard by a sentinel who had been
listening during all these critical days in the shelter of a cave in the
Orongo cliff called Haka-rongo-manu (Listening-to-the-birds).

Immediately this signal had been given, the hopu prepared to
leave the islet. But before going they waited for the servant who
had found the egg to perform a brief ceremony. He dipped the
precious object in the sea, then bound it to his forehead. Thereupon
they all threw themselves into the water and swam for the shore.
The return swim was reputedly less dangerous than the outward
journey, since the swimmers were under the protection of the sacred
symbol. If they kept close to its bearer they had nothing to fear
from the sharks, the swell or the breakers: the es would not allow
the man he had favoured with his grace, and who shared in the
sacred aura of his person, to perish.

The hopu with the egg on fis focehadk climbed the high Orongo
cliff as fast as he could, and ceremoniously handed the egg to his
master. This act brought his functions to an end, for—apart from a
few exceptional cases—it was not he, but his master, who became
a bird-man.

As soon as the name of the new bird-man had been proclaimed
by the sentinel, the elect of the god Makemake shaved his head, his
eyebrows and his eyelashes. A priest tied a piece of red tapa cloth
round the arm that had received the sacred egg, and sipped a sliver
of sandalwood underneath it. During this investiture the chanters

--- PAGE 157 ---
136 EASTER ISLAND

intoned hymns and t petbii and the victor's relatives manifested
their triumph in wild dances.

The bird-man, his face covered with red and black stripes and
with a bird—probably a wooden one—attached to his back, placed
himself at the head of the pilgrims of Orongo, who formed a tumul-
tuous procession and descended towards Mataveri. He is said to
have been escorted by other warriors who had also received manu-
tara eggs, no doubt collected by their servants before they left Moru-
nui. Fhe god’s anointed carried the egg in the palm of his hand,
covered with a picce of red tapa. He intoned an incantation in a
quayering, tearful voice of which Tepano gave a wonderful imita-
tion, although he could remember none of the words. The bird-
man’s demcanour betrayed extreme agitation and distress. He
behaved ‘like a god’, that is to say, like someone who had become
the vessel of the deity. Here, in Tepano’s own words, is his descri
tion of the dancers and the appearance of the crowd that made its
way to Mataveri: ‘The men leapt about, twirling their dance

les. They wore wigs made of women’s hair. wore tur-
bans of tapa or awe of leaves. Some were ornamented with
hair. They beandished their dance paddles and made their bodies
tremble.”

The ion sto} at Mataveri to celebrate joyously the
sence aaa a them of a new bird-man. Human ict ie p
by the priests or the bird-man were sacrificed to Makemake. Their
bodies, cooked in cnormous ovens, ‘ovided the food for noisy
banquets in! sed with dances male chanting. The relatives and
friends of the Elect, carried away by his triumph, mocked their
rivals or enemics. These acts of bravado degenerated into outbreaks
of violence that led first to raids, then to fireraising and pitched
battles,

Letters ee missionaries on Easter Island contain frequent refer-
ences to the excitabilii to which everyone was prone during the
eo of this “Campus Marts’. How long did this state of anarchy

? We do not know. Calm may have re-established when
the bird-man departed to live in seclusion in a hut near Ranu-kao
or, according to other authorities, No imnthen nn eae
Ing some important ahu. The tabus surrounding this
sacred personage lasted a year. He could not leave his retreat, was

--- PAGE 158 ---
RELIGION AND MAGIC 137

forbidden to bathe, and was forced—on pain of death—to i
continence. He was provided with a special servant who his
food in an oven reserved for this purpose. The only external sign
of his distinction was a peculiar head-dress, a sort of wig made of
women’s hair.

The Aopu or servant who had found the egg was likewise sub-
jected to religious interdicts. He withdrew into solitude for several
months and could not touch food with the hand that had been
rendered tabu by contact with the sacred object. The sanctity with
which he was impregnated also contaminated his wife and children,
who, for a certain time, were treated like pariahs.

The manu-tara egg was blown, filled with tapa, and hung in the
bird-man’s hut. It was venerated for the great magical virtues attri-
buted to it. It was believed to bring abundance, “The i Ses a
magician,’ Tepano explained to me. ‘It gave potatoes, chickens,
ae, eels Gad cagiah! Fishing in the open sea began soon after its

iscovery,

In vk nt state of our knowledge we can sce no relation
between the apparcat abject of these ceremonies and the exceptional
position this egg hunt seems to have held in the islanders’ social and
religious life. For a period of seclusion subject to uncomfortable
tabus would not appear likely to stir the ambition of war chiefs.

The religious sense, and the prestige attached to being the ‘lord's
anointed’, are undoubtedly potent stimulants of human action in
themselves; but they only partially explain the passionate rivalries
that came to light during festivities. Did the bird-man derive
material eee advantages from his position? It seems
extremely likely.

To begin with, he had the satisfaction of giving his name to the
new year. This name was not the one he had borne up to then, but
another, more sacred one, that was revealed to him in a dream.
Thus Tepano’s paternal uncle, Ruc, took the name of Rokunga,
which he subsequently gave to his nephew. The year 1866 or i
when he emerged victorious from the egg hunt, was called Rok-
Sk ecieeeg mbrprminese Preside act

ifferent tribes, and those who refused to bring their contribution
were liable to have their huts burnt down.

The nature of the bird-man’s authority is not clear. Only his

--- PAGE 159 ---
138 EASTER ISLAND

economic privileges are mentioned in our sources. He had a right
to claim more than his fair share during family festivals. Mission-
aries describe these personages as birds of prey, ready to pounce on
their victims and strip them of their possessions. No one dared
complain too openly, so much were they feared.

This tyranny of the bird-men perhaps explains the nature of their
function. In their capacity as the war chiefs or caudillos of a tribe
possessing the hegemony over part, or even the whole, of the island,
they held political power. The discovery of the egg invested them
with a sacred authority. They became, like the ariki, god-men.
Strong in the presence of the deity, they could—without fear of
sacrilegious opposition—seize pro and enjoy advantages which,
at other times, they would rrcbubty kane had to fight for.

These rights to plunder were doubtless more theoretical than real,
for, if they had been universally recognized, it would be difficult
to explain the state of war that seems to have reigned during the
Mataveri assemblies—at least during the early period of the island’s
Christianization.

The human sacrifices that took place at Mataveri, and the canni-
bal banquets that followed them, had a great deal to do with the
warlike mood that developed at the end of the festival. The victims’
families would have had to be crushed and completely humiliated
if their resentment was not to find expression in acts of war.

aga showed us the bird-man’s dwellings at Rano-raraku.
Nearby are the remains of Orohie ahu, in which the bird-men were
interred.

The funeral rites observed in their honour differed from those of
ordinary mortals. Representatives of different tribes attended their
funerals and all the other bird-men honoured their confrére with
their presence. They kept apart from the crowd, and their réle in
these ceremonies was to release the ten cocks that had been tied to
the dead man’s toes. They passed on these birds to the dead man’s
son, for whom they became tabu, as did any fowl that had touched
the soil of the ah in which the bird-man’s remains reposed.

After a year the magic egg lost its power. It was thrown into the
sea or placed in a crack in the rock along the Rano-raraku cliff.

Soon after the Mataveri festivities a team of young men returned
to Motu-nui to obtain fresh manu-tara eggs and, if possible, chicks.

--- PAGE 160 ---
RELIGION AND MAGIC 139

These eggs had not yet joined the ranks of profane objects. They
were offered to the gods, and those destined to be eaten were given
to the mata-kio or slaves, whose deaths were of little importance.
Some young manu-tara were kept in captivity until they could fly.
A strip of red tapa cloth was then tied round their wings and they
were released with the words: ‘Ka oho ki hiva .. . Go to a foreign
country.”

There is no equivalent to the feast of the bird-man in the rest of
Polynesia. In many respects it recalls the ceremonies which, in other

ts of the world, establish a mystic relationship between the
‘ecundating forces of nature and a man who became a temporary
king. These are the god-kings discussed by Frazer in The Golden
Bough. The parallels that can be traced between the bird-man and
these sacred personages are striking: the same connexion with
spring, the same importance accorded to the first-fruits, the same
insistence on the king’s seclusion, the same brevity of his reign.
One of our sources referred to obscene dances performed at Orongo
by naked women. This detail is strangely reminiscent of the fertility
rites that accompany the whole magico-religious complex of the
god-men.

The drama enacted on the flanks of Rano-kao, overlooking the
green lake at the bottom of the crater, is perhaps in its deepest
essence a replica of the ancient rites eubeatetia the groves of Lake
ag among the Alban Hills, to ensure human beings their daily

read.

The concept of the tabu or religious interdict, so deeply ingrained
in Polynesian cultures, could not fail to leave its imprint on Easter
Island. Ninety years of Christianity have not wiped it out. Today
stomach disorders still threaten every plebeian who marries a Miru
woman, ulcers eat into the legs of those who walk on land formerly
placed under an interdict, and mothers take great care not to eat
above the head of their children.

Thanks to Father Englert, we know some of the tabus affecting
the manufacture of fishing-nets. Nobody—especially no woman—
was allowed near the patch of beach where the ex gathered for
this work. Children were permitted to sit beside them so as to learn
their art, but they were forbidden to play games and above all to

--- PAGE 161 ---
140 EASTER ISLAND

pass under the nets. The craftsman charged with beginning the net
had to finish the first row of meshes before sunrise. He was a lied
with an ovenful of food by the future owner. The work could not
be interrupted until the net was completely finished. Furthermore,
it had to be delivered into the owner’s hands by those who made it.
They used it for three days before handing it over to the client or
clients who had ordered it.

The first missionaries to the island draw attention to these tabus,
which they were determined to wipe out, and complain of the
resistance they encountered over this point. In vain they demon-
strated the emptiness of the natives’ fears by walking on tabu
ground and by trampling on the mounds of earth or branches that
indicated the sanctity of some particular spot. Their ostentatious
violation of tabus made no impression on the Easter Islanders, who
merely concluded that the strangers’ mana protected them against
the magic action of the interdicts. On the other hand, they turned
their wrath against those of their compatriots who ventured to
imitate them.

A violated tabu could bring death. We have already seen that
fish lay under an interdict during the winter months. Those who
ate them during this period were supposed to die an agonizing
death. The tunny or kahi was pee dangerous. To destroy
what they considered an absurd prejudice, the French Fathers en-
couraged the natives to eat fish during this season. A few Easter
Islanders overcame their terror, but a messenger came to announce
that a boy who had swallowed a few mouthfuls of tunny was writh-
ing on the ground in the death agony. The missionaries hastened to
the spot, greatly alarmed by this turn of events. They triumphed in
the end, however, b’ area at the victim’s apprehensions until
they had convinced him that th were groundless and that he had
nothing to fear from his audacious gesture. The poisoning of which
the young man was dying was of a psychosomatic nature: not find-
ing in the priests’ attitude the sympathy that would have confirmed
his terror, he escaped from the emotional and physiological dis-
turbances that would otherwise have shortly caused his death.

Tabus guaranteed respect of ownership. Anyone who wished to
reserve to himself the right of fishing on the shore adjoining his
property had only to place three stones one on top of the other. The

--- PAGE 162 ---
RELIGION AND MAGIC 141

same symbol, or the branch of a tree, protected fields from tres-
passers; but, to be valid, the sign of the interdict had to be put in
position by a chief or some influential man. Crops were subject to
royal tabu until the moment when the first fruits had been pre-
sented to the ariki-mau.

Violation of a tabu not only calls down a supernatural sanction,
but also arouses the deep resentment of whoever has placed his per-
son or possessions under its protection. His dignity is at stake and
he may take up arms to avenge his honour.

The ahu were probably tabu, for the natives showed great annoy-
ance when European visitors went close to examine them

The first voyagers were highly intrigued by cairns of stones
crowned by a sort of white hat, which they observed at various
places on the island. These humble monuments were pipihereko or
tabu symbols. They were often erected on the occasion of funerals.
This ee may explain the mimicry in which the natives indulged
when asked to explain the nature of these objects by signs. At Vai-
mata one of these cairns stands on the ahu itself. Perhaps it was left
there after the funeral of the last man to be interred in this

mausoleum.

The distinction between priest and medicine-man, always difficult
to draw, has been entirely blotted out from the memory of the
present generations, Medicine-men and sorcerers are also described
by the term ivi-atua, although the words tangata-taku or koromaki
seem to have been especially reserved for them.

All the important or common acts of life were accompanied by
spells and incantations, which gave those who pronounced them the
sense of security necessary for the success of a risky undertaking.

We have seen the priest in his réle of a magician exorcizing evil
spirits. White magic has its counterpart in black magic.

This is the procedure for killing a man, as described to us by
Carlos Teao: take a cock and bury it head downward in a hole.
Trampling on the spot where the bird is dying of suffocation, pro-
nounce a charm naming the intended victim. The result is certain—
he will die, unless some more powerful magician comes to his
assistance.

It is also possible to influence other people’s actions, or even to

--- PAGE 163 ---
142 EASTER ISLAND

make them ill, by a simple incantation. The following is an example
of one such formula: ‘Ka oho ki te kokoma se taviri, ka
tavara—Go and penetrate his entrails, he staggers, he falls.’

The agent of death thus despatched is no doubt a tutelary spirit
employed by the magician to carry out his will. Teao us
that the intermediary was an animal depicted on the tablets. This
is doubtful, but it is an interesting idea, for it would explain the
superstitious terror in which these pieces of engraved wood are
held: the signs may well be lucie» as so many little devils wait-
ing to be launched against their prey.

The magic of words, in the most literal sense, has always been
very clearly perceived by Polynesians. Their constantly alert sea-
sibilities cdi spose them to snatch at the slightest phrase casting a
slur on their mein Co vanity. If they find a threatening implica-
tion in a sentence, their reaction is terrible. Brother Eyraud has left
a vivid account of one episode among his misfortunes on the island
that may serve to illustrate this, Wishing to warn his ‘evil genius’,
Torometi, that he would have to answer for his iniquities in another
life and to remind him that he was mortal, but being still un-
familiar with the language of the island, he used the phrase ‘E poke
ee—you will die’. He had no sooner uttered these words than Toro-
meti behaved as though struck by lightning. He turned pale, he
trembled, and his gestures betrayed the most abject terror coupled
with ing rage. ‘The Father said, ““E pohe oe”’,’ he cried to the
oud soho were no less horror-stricken by the malediction than he
himself. Realizing the full significance of his unfortunate phrase,
the missionary did his best to pacify those who had been shocked by
the brutality of his imprecation.

Religion and medicine were inseparable. This was a very natural
association, for most of the diseases from which the natives
were attributed to the malevolence of demons or gods who took

ion of their victims’ bodies in order to torment them. These
intrusions by spirits occurred without the patient at first being
aware of them; he did not notice anything until he felt the first
symptoms of the illness. A priest was immediately sent for. He
called upon the victim to confess, to find out wh he had vio-
lated some tabu or committed some other sacrilege. He then
addressed himself to the spirit, whose replies were uttered in a

--- PAGE 164 ---
RELIGION AND MAGIC 143
strident tone, politely inviting him to remove himself. Only when
the spirit proved stubborn did the priest resort to force, He jumped
on the spirit if he tried to take refuge in a corner of the hut; he
sprang at the walls, halted, watched for him, and went in pursuit
again. The door was barricaded and, as an added precaution, the
hut was sometimes covered with a net. After a hunt of varying
duration, the ivi-atua seized the sick man’s clothes, ran out o the
hut, and cast spirit and clothing into the flames lit nearby. He then
returned to his patient and informed him that he was finally cured,
In especially serious cases the hut was set alight and the svi-atua
mounted guard, to hurl the spirit back into the flames if he should
ie to escape.

If the patient died, the priest saved his reputation by announcing
that an unknown and more powerful spirit had taken the place of
the one he had driven out.

Treatment was not exclusively magico-religious in character.
Magic and science were sometimes combined. One of the favourite
therapeutic procedures was to make the patient sweat by laying him
ona banana leaves in an #mu containing white-hot stones.
The ancient Easter Islanders were also skilful masseurs, Thomson
writes that during his laborious trip across the island he was much
comforted by the energetic treatment of native practitioners, who
rubbed his aching muscles until he dozed off.

The island’s flora is too poor to haye favoured the development
of a pharmacopoeia of any importance. A few plants, notably ver-
yain and the bamboos introduced last century, are held nowadays
to possess medicinal propertics; but the natives prefer European
remedies,

The healers (ivi-atwa) charged heavily for their services, The fees
were foodstuffs or articles of carved wood. Those who failed to pay
their debts exposed themselves to the medicine-man’s revenge.

--- PAGE 165 ---
CHAPTER VIII

Ancestor Images

THE LITTLE wooden statuettes or moai kavakava, so highly prized
by collectors, belong to the island’s religious art, just as much as the
famous statucs on the mausoleums—and like them are accessories of
its cult.

body shows the vertebrae, protruding ribs, and a breast-bone as
h as the carina of a fowl, ‘The top of the skull is sometimes

monster, There are a

private collections, y are very uniform in type, and it is only in

recent and already decadent specimens that the details suggestive of

2 corpse tend to diminish or di % ;
In addition to these moat Fey bia flat images of female figures

—called moui paa were also caryed. These scul es are com-

pentesy rare, of late date, and executed in a eae has not

stress these or to suggest
The wooden figurines were inspired by the shape in which the

144

--- PAGE 166 ---
ANCESTOR IMAGES 145

Tu‘u-ko-ihu was going to his house called Hare-koka [ House-
of-the-cockroaches] at Hanga-hahave. As he was crossing the hill
of Punapau he saw two spirits sleeping at the foot of a cliff of red
stone. They were Hiti-rau and Nuku-te-mango. He caught a
glimpse of their protruding ribs and hollow bellies. Another
akuaku [ spirit, spectre], who was awake, cried: ‘Wake up, the
noble chief has seen our protruding ribs.’

Hiti-rau and Nuku-te-mango ran after Tu‘u-ko-ihu, and when
they had caught up with him they asked him: ‘O Chief, what did
you see?’ ‘Nothing,’ replied Tu‘u-ko-ihu. The spirits asked him
again: ‘O Chief, are you certain you saw nothing. Perhaps you
are mistaken?’ ‘I saw nothing,’ repeated Tu‘u-ko-ihu, and he
went on his way.

The spirits disappeared, but a little while afterwards they met
the chief again as he went on his way and asked him: “What do
you know about us?’ Three times they asked him the same ques-
tion, but Tu‘u-ko-ihu continued to answer: ‘I know nothing.’ If
the chief had hesitated, or if he had told them what he had seen,
the two spirits would certainly have killed him.

When Tu‘u-ko-ihu reached Hare-koka the people of the dis-
trict were opening the ovens in which they had cooked their food.
Tu‘u-ko-ihu picked up two half-burnt firebrands and took them
into his hut. He carved them to represent the two spirits he had
seen. That night he saw in a dream some female spirits, which he
reproduced next day in another piece of wood.

The news that Tu‘u-ko-ihu had carved images in wood spread
throughout the island. Everyone came and ordered images from
him. Tu‘u-koihu kept his promises, but several people, in their
ingratitude, made him no gift of food. Tu‘u-ko-ihu refused to
give them the statuettes he had made for them. One evening,
when they had come to claim them, Tu‘u-ko-ihu said to them:
‘Come here.’ They went into his hut and saw the images dancing
of their own accord, by magic. They were struck with fear and
paid their debts.

The function of these images in the island’s religious life is ob-
scure, but their ritual ncaa is well established by allusions
made to them by those who had an opportunity of living among the

--- PAGE 167 ---
146 EASTER ISLAND

Easter Islanders before their conversion. On several occasions,
Brother Eyraud saw his hosts pick up these images, execute a few
dance movements with them, and intone a brief chant in their
honour. He did not consider that these actions were worthy of
being described as ‘religious’ in nature.

These images were also displayed during festivals, notably at
harvest time, when the tribute of first fruits was paid. In between
times, they were kept in the huts, carefully wrapped in tapa cloth.
Their owners liked to put them on show, and they attached them
to their persons in order to dance with them. Some people wore up
to a score of them. When they were taken out of their tapa wrap-
pings, chants were sung and they were handled like babies. At
religious ceremonies they were given a place of honour.

Human statuettes of wood served in the rest of Polynesia as
temporary tabernacles for gods and ancestral spirits. In the Whan-
ganui district of New Zealand, each one of the little images kept in
the huts was dedicated to the spirit of one of the family’s ancestors.
The latter was believed to become incarnate in the image when he
wished to converse with the living. The Tahitian tit were also
temporary vessels of minor deities or spirits, who were called into
them by the priests. The very realistically conceived Mangarevan
images represented gods. These comparisons give some weight to
the Easter Island tradition that their wooden images were carved on
the death of a member of the family.

These figurines were capable of being animated by a supernatural
force, as the following legend testifies. A young man had borrowed
a statuette from Tu‘u-ko-ihu to decorate the hut in which he was
giving a feast. The hut caught fire and everything in it was burnt.
The young man went immediately to Tu‘u-ko-ihu to tell him of
the mishap and offer him compensation. As he entered the ariki’s
hut he saw to his astonishment the statuette which he had believed
lost—intact. Tu‘u-ko-ihu, who had heard a loud clamour at the
moment the fire broke out, had merely said: ‘O my brother, Little-
Papping bud, come back’; and the statue had come back of its own

accord.

Surprise has been expressed at the readiness with which the Easter
Haas parted with these images to their visitors, and for this
reason their religious character has been doubted. Like many objects

--- PAGE 168 ---
ANCESTOR IMAGES 147

of the same order, they only became sacred when the spirits des-
cended into them. They lost much of their sanctity outside the
ceremonies or when some occurrence deprived them of their mystic
aura.

These statuettes are still carved by the present-day natives, who
thus continue an artistic tradition that was interrupted after the
Christianization of the island, to be reborn when the Easter
Islanders noticed their visitors’ enthusiasm for these objects and
their value as articles of barter. Today the manufacture of statuettes
has become an industry. They are turned out in organized work-
shops by a master craftsman and his assistants. In the workshop of
the most famous of these sculptors, Gabriel Beri Beri, Lavachery
not only saw figurines being mass-produced, but aberrant forms
made to gratify the bad taste of Chilean crews. Among these
‘curios’ was an image of a skeletal man wearing a naval officer’s
cap, others holding a second statuette in their arms, and finally
some giving the military salute. Our informant Tepano sculptured
figurines that differed completely from the traditional type of moat
kavakava. They consisted of various kinds of monsters, often in-
spired by the shape of the piece of wood he had managed to pro-
cure. These creations, which are without parallel in the island’s art,
were called by their author manu-uru, a word that also means
‘mask’ in the modern dialect of the island. Tepano used an adze
left him by a famous sculptor named Tomenika, to which he attri-
buted magic powers. It was possession of this instrument that had
made a sculptor of him, for before inheriting it he had not known
how to carve wood. This is what Lavachery wrote about Tepano,
whom we often watched at work:

The way in which the primitive craftsmen handled, the adze
filled us with admiration. The vigour, precision and steadiness
with which Tepano struck the wood ed took off a regular chip
—often as long and thin as a leaf—was in no way inferior to what
I have seen done by the Negro sculptors of Africa. The image
gradually emerged from the block, carved in neat and ual
facets. As the details appeared, the adze blows became less it bore
while losing nothing of their firmness. Sometimes—for example,
to trace the hollow of the eyebrow arch—Tepano took the adze

--- PAGE 169 ---
148 EASTER ISLAND

by the blade and used it like the point of a knife. This was also
the way in which he drew the lines representing the hair or
tattooing and separated the fingers of the hand. He made no use
of his pocket-knife until the moment came to pierce in the centre
of the eyeball a hole two centimetres deep, into which he inserted
a circle of mutton bone (in the old days it would have been
human bone), in the hollow centre of which he fitted a shiny
knob of obsidian. Neither the bone nor the volcanic glass were
held in place by any adhesive. They were so perfectly mounted
one in the other and the two of them in the wood that there was
no play whatever.

Finally, Tepano meticulously scraped the surface of his carving
with a piece of window glass, carefully preserved for this work.
He told us that in the old days a piece of obsidian was used for
this purpose.

--- PAGE 170 ---
CHAPTER IX

The Great Statues

Rano-raraku quarry—Significance of the great statues—T heir
transportation—T heir end

Easter IsLanp’s fame is due to its great statues. They are and
will remain the very symbol of its mysterious past. Their presence
on this solitary and bare islet is as much of a riddle today as at the
time when Roggeveen, the first European to contemplate them,
wrote in his log: ‘These stone figures filled us with amazement, for
we could not understand how people without solid spars and with-
out ropes were able to raise them...”

Our first contact with the great statues was mingled with dis-
appointment. Shortly after disembarking, and in the pouring rain,
we went to look at those that had appeared to Cook and La Pérouse
when they landed on the same shore. They lie today like ponderous
hulks on the inclined surface of Koirorooa ahu, not far from the
mole built by the Chileans with the rubble of their platforms. Their
destruction was reported as long ago as 1815 by Kotzebue, who had
tried to look at them from the topside of his whaler. So we did not
ee to see them on their mausoleum, crowned with red hats, as

ey had appeared to the great cighteenth-cen' navigators. We
had, ieee supposed om — fie ae see a these
prostrate figures would have retained some majesty. Our disillusion-
ment was perhaps comparable to the feeling which made Rog-
geveen and Cook imagine that these statues were an agglomerate of
mud. Cut in volcanic cinder, whose grey nodules beisle all over the
surface like so many warts, they show no sign of the arduous
struggle of the sculptor with his material.

The majority of these statues lie face downwards, leaving nothin,
to be seen but the flat, narrow neck and the slightly arched bac’
that widens out below the belt. These so-called statues are, in fact,
enormous busts, monstrous legless cripples with heads too long for
their massive trunks. Amidst the black rubble their yellowish hue
strikes a discordant note in the colour-scheme of the landscape. The

149

--- PAGE 171 ---
150 EASTER ISLAND

tufa of which they are made breaks up easily, and many of them
seem to have disintegrated under the effects of rain and returned to
the earth from which they came.

It would be unjust to deny all grandeur to these sculptures be-
cause they are no longer in position on the lofty platform of the
mausoleums and because they have suffered the depradations of
man and time. We became aware of a certain ponderous majesty
when a tour of the island brought us to Tonga-riki ahu. This sanc-
tuary was formerly surmounted by fifteen statues. Like the rest,
they have all been thrown down, with the exception of the lower
part of one of them, which still rests on its basalt pedestal.

The head of one statue had broken as it fell, and come to rest
against a heap of rubble. Against this mound of scoriae it leans its
face, pitted with two orbits as deep as those of a skull. This macabre
vision is thoroughly in keeping with its surroundings in a place
where everything seems to speak of death and funerals. There is
nothing that does not wear an air of mourning—the plain covered
with volcanic debris, the outcrops of basalt, the walls of the mauso-
leum, and even the sea that rolls slowly over slabs of calcined and
blackened lava.

This decapitated bust, this head with its empty sockets, aid the
imagination in replacing on the pedestals from which they fell
the fifteen giants that have been knocked down like so many
Aunt Sallies. One can imagine them as they were in better days:
upright, their backs to the sea and their great orbits fixed on the tall
cliff of Rano-raraku. Here the same urge is expressed as in the
ancient civilizations of Asia—the overwhelming desire to combine
aesthetic satisfaction with a sense of the stupendous, artistic form
with staggering proportions. This mania for the colossal in a world
where everything else is on a tiny scale, and among a people with
limited resources, constitutes the whole miracle of Easter Island.

These rough and angular monsters must have presented a strange
spectacle at sunset or on moonlight nights when their looming sil-
houettes were outlined against fe Pacific. It has been claimed that
these images were set up to defend the land against invasion by the
sea. This is an absurdly romantic interpretation, for they turned
their backs to the foe and invariably faced the gentle hills and stony
plains of the interior. They are indifferent to the ocean’s struggle

--- PAGE 172 ---
THE GREAT STATUES I5r

with the island, but the waves are none the less bent on their des-
truction. They are slowly breaking up the statues they can reach
with their spray and sapping the cliffs that support them. Some of
the statues have already fallen victims to the surge.

A lot has been written about the disdainful sneer on these great
faces, This expression is striking on the volcano statues, whose thin,
pouting lips seem full of contempt. It is less evident in the images
on the ahu. Wind and weather hae doubtless brought about this
softening of the features by reducing the sharpness of their contours.
In our view, the Easter Island sculptors worked in a material so
soft that it made for a certain laziness. They too readily accepted a
single formula that they could reproduce without effort. Their first
conception was bold; theie mistake was to remain satisfied with it.
They did not always avoid the weaknesses of mass-production.

Some of the statues were probably painted. When we entered the
platform of Vinapu ahu, which had been emptied of its rubble and
converted into a kind of vault after the fall of the statues, we dis-
covered that the parts of the busts protected from wind and weather
bore traces of red and white paint. The same was apparently true of
the British Museum statue of Hoa-haka-hana-ia, which at the time
of its removal, was smeared with red and white ochre.

Roggeveen, in his haste to quit these inhospitable shores, ima-
gined that the statues wore on their heads baskets full of white
stones. The oddity of this ornament made a vivid impression on the
minds of all those who saw it in situ. Their amazement is under-
standable in view of the fact that these ‘hats’ measured up to nine
feet in height and six feet and a half in diameter. One rainy day we
took refuge inside one of these cylinders that had been converted
into a shelter.

All the ‘hats’ came from Mount Punapau, a crater that rises be-
hind Hanga-roa. Twenty-three of these cylinders have remained at
their place of origin, probably dating from the time when work was
discontinued on Rano-raraku. The Punapau quarry was visited by
some members of Captain Cook’s crew, who already noticed the
abandoned cylinders. There is nothing remarkable about this
modest crater, except perhaps its red colour, which causes it to gape
like a bloody wound in the midst of the green pastures.

Various hypotheses have been advanced to explain the signifi-

--- PAGE 173 ---
152 EASTER ISLAND

cance of these cylinders. They have been described in turn as hats,
turbans, feather diadems, funerary symbols, and whitewashed hair.
No one has been willing to sce them for what they really are: a
naive imitation of the top-knot, although—like the top-knot itself—
they are called pukao. This headgear represents a late innovation
that did not have time to become universally adopted, for a large
number of the statues are without it—especially those on the
yolcano.

The statues that surmounted the great mausoleums numbered
about three hundred. This figure is approximate, because many of
them have been completely destroyed & the natives during the last
few years, while others have been buried in the wreckage of their
ahu or, in some cases, included in the material used to build new
sanctuaries. The height of these statues varies between eleven and
eighteen feet. Those on the south coast are generally taller and of
larger bulk than those on the west coast. The largest statue on an
ahu is that called Paro, which lies on Te Pito-te-kura aku. It is
thirty-three feet high and twenty-five feet eight inches in circum-
ference, and certainly weighs more than twenty tons. It is sur-
mounted by a cylinder that is six feet high and eight feet across.

Only a few ahz statues were carved in basalt: all the others came
from the quarry on Rano-raraku, which lies to the east of the island,
near Poike peninsula. This crater is the last in a system of volcanic
cones stretching across the island from Rano-aroi. It is formed of
thick layers of cinders. Its southern face, which has been eaten away
by the sea, consists of a steep wall cut by a deep gash. The quarry
is situated on the south-west slope and in the interior of the crater,
where the tufa is most easily accessible. The entrance to these two
vast sculptors’ workshops is guarded by an army of statues which,
unlike the rest, are not connected with any aku.

If the name of Easter Island still evokes unfathomable mysteries,
if the present inhabitants have been declared unworthy to be the
descendants of those who carved the statues, it is because this wild
spot has fired the imagination of all who saw it. Whatever their
turn of mind, personal culture or sensibility, the words in which
they describe Rano-raraku have always borne the stamp of sincere
and profound emotion. It was the sum total of these impressions

--- PAGE 174 ---
THE GREAT STATUES 153

that gave birth to the legend of Easter Island as a relic of Atlantis.

During the three weeks we lived among these statues we saw
them in sunshine, by moonlight, and on stormy nights. Each time
we felt the same shock, the same uneasiness, as on the first day.
This sense of oppression is due less to their dimensions than to their
confused distribution. If they were arranged in some apparent order
one could catch a glimpse of the purpose and plan of the dead; but
the almost human casualness and turbulence with which this
assembly of giants with huge noses and flat necks is scattered about
is somehow disturbing.

All the statues have been carved on a single model, but their
capricious grouping seems to endow them with a certain individu-
ality. Some appear to have gathered for a friendly chat; others gain
from their isolation a disdainful and ill-humoured air; yet others
seem bowed down with care and inspire pity. All these images bore
names, and some still retain them today. It is as though the natives,
too, had perceived how humanly accessible these statues look.

Behind the swarms of statues standing on the grassy slope of the
volcano is the army of those about to be born. Notwithstanding the
fact that the workshop is abandoned and silent and the sculptors
long ago dead, these rough-hewn or half-carved statues waiting to
be taken down into the plain create a more living atmosphere than
the finished sculptures that stand guard at the outposts of the
quarry. Here everything is expressive of work and effort.

To the visitor walking round the quarry it seems as though this
were a day of rest. The workmen have gone home to their villages,
but tomorrow they will be back and the mountainside will ring
with the blows of stone hammers; it will echo with laughter, dis-
cussions, and the rhythmic chanting of the men hauling the statues.
How could they fail to come back, these sculptors who have left
their tools lying at the foot of the work, where one only has to
bend down to pick them up?

A few sections of the cliff have been shorn off perpendicularly
and the statues carved from them have long stood on one of the
island’s ahu. In a crypt patiently hollowed out with picks, a fifty-
foot colossus sleeps on a bed of stone. Another month of under-
cutting and he would have been ready to leave his niche and go
down into the plain. Now he will remain here for centuries, sur-

--- PAGE 175 ---
154 EASTER ISLAND

rounded by ferns like an abandoned corpse. And his two com-
panions, whose faces and chests only just emerge from the tufa at
the threshold of the crypt, are also dead men.

To reach the neighbouring niches it is necessary to walk on
bodies, to catch hold of noses, to step across blocks and outcrops of
tufa transformed into statues or the embryos of statues. The visitor
distinguishes one or two at first, then suddenly realizes that he is
sitting on a gigantic eyebrow arch. He rises to examine it, but next
to it he sees hands resting on a belly, and next to this torso another
head. The contours merge so thoroughly into the grisaille of the
rock that spotting the heads and bodies becomes almost a game. An
enormous statue is stretched out like a sleeping giant beneath a kind
of dais carved in the tufa. The water dripping from the cliff has
worn its chest into a hollow. :

Some of the statues are almost finished. A few blows with a ham-
mer would have been enough to sever the long thin strip of stone
holding the body to its matrix, and the statue would have been ready
to slide on to the close-set, tough grass. In some cases, even, they have
been chocked up with stones in preparation for the moment when
they would be entirely dase from the gangue in which they
were cut. A few of these unfinished statues are so prodigious that it
is spree whether the sculptors really intended to complete
and shift them. One of these colossi is sixty feet long and occupies
the whole length of one ridge of the mountain. Perhaps it was only
a huge petroglyph intended to remain as we now see it. The frenzy
that impelled the Easter Islanders to carve dozens of statues simul-
taneously is a strange phenomenon for which we can find no
explanation, not even a hypothetical one.

The statue-makers also installed themselves in the interior of the
crater, where a different atmosphere reigns. The bottom of the
funnel is occupied by a reed-fringed lake at which cattle drink. The
horizon is bounded by verdant slopes that make of this pocket a
world ape set in the island like a jewel. In this landscape the
statues that rise from the shores of the lagoon towards the crest of
the volcano have a more friendly and peaceful look than those that
watch like sentinels on the borders of their domain.

The statues in and around the crater of Mount Rano-raraku are
of a different type from those which decorate the ahu. The two

--- PAGE 176 ---
THE GREAT STATUES 155

groups are closely related, but distinguished by certain details of
style whose conventional character is clearly demonstrated by their
constant repetition. In the first place, the volcano statues do not
show the hollow orbits that give the ahu statues their slightly skull-
like appearance. The concave plane corresponding to the cheeks
runs right up to the underside of the eyebrow arch, whose shadow
creates the illusion of eyes. The back of the neck is also flatter and,
as it was not intended to carry a red cylinder, the top of the head is
narrower. From a purely aesthetic point of view, Rano-raraku
statues are undoubtedly superior. The lines of the nose and cheek-
bones are vigorous, the neck emerges more distinctly, and the over-
all outline is less bulky. The mausoleum statues, which rest on slabs
of stone on top of a platform, are more squat and their bases
broaden out to give them stability. Two of the Rano-raraku statues
that have been excavated—one by Mrs Routledge, the other by our
expedition—have bases ending in a peg, a detail clearly indicating
that they were intended to be planted in the ground. This character-
istic may well recur in other statues of this group, although the un-
oy specimens do not exhibit this peculiarity and have flat
ases.

Our prolonged contact with the volcano statues enabled us to
observe some interesting facts. When we uncovered their bases we
Sa that they were often clumsy and badly trimmed. The

ack was not finished until the statue was in position, and the sculp-
tors were obliged to erect a scaffolding in order to get at it. The
statues that have not undergone these finishing touches have thick,
shapeless necks on which the crest that joined them to the rock is
still visible. The quarry workers were generally conscientious. They
polished the surfaces of their sculptures till they had rendered them
almost smooth to the touch. Certain parts of the body, such as the
ears and hands, were carved with meticulous care. The hands,
whose aS are as elongated as though they ended in mandarin’s
finger-nails, are treated in the same manner as in the wooden statu-
ettes, with the thumb curving slightly outwards. The parallels be-
tween these two types of sculpture are important in determining the
age and origin of thes great statues. They also extend to other details,
for instance some of the tufa statues, Tike some of the moai kava-
Rava, bear a sort of O and M in relief above horizontal lines. These

--- PAGE 177 ---
156 EASTER 1SLAND

designs must be in ted as conventional tions of the
tapa belt and its Sot. Ato statues bear Bastcsie the ney such
as wavy lines, that are faithful reproductions of Easter Island tattoo
patterns appropriate to this part of the body.

Landslides that have taken place at several Nigra along the slopes
of the volcano have uprooted some busts and dragged them down
to the foot of the mountain. Other statues have been completely
buried under the rubble. In one case only the head is visible, and in
others nothing but the brow emerges from the turf.

Long before the arrival of the Whites, the natives must have
visited the quarry, where they passed their time engraving designs
on the walls of tufa or even on the statues themselves. They a
aaa delight in portraying the frigate-bird and the god with
big eyes. Their European and Chilean successors contented them-
ves with perpetuating their own names or those of their ships.

About four miles from Rano-raraku across the plain that occupies
the centre of the island, or along the southern coast, rows of statucs
begin to succeed one another at more or less regular intervals. A
few are broken, but the majority are simply lying on the grass. The
natives say that these advance guards of oe army of the volcano are
statues whose magical march towards the coastal mausoleums was
suddenly halted by an evil spell. A more rational explanation seems
to be that these statues were left by the wayside when work at the
quarry stopped. Some archacologists have compared them to the
‘tired stones’ of Peru that never reached the cyclopean building-
works for which they were intended. They see in their abandon-
ment proof of a cataclysm that surprised the ancient population at
the height of its creative period.

It is the isolation of these statues that has given rise to this illu-
sion, for none of them scems to have been destined for an aha. In
olden times they stood at the same places where they now lic. To
es this, there is no need of the technical arguments put

Mrs Routledge. It is enough to read Captain Cook's description
ob the south coast, which he had reconnoitred by members of his
crew. He notes in a region that must correspond to the bay of Vaihu
the existence of statues which—contrary to those previously seen in
the rest of the island—were planted ‘cia En the growed ne

--- PAGE 178 ---
THE GREAT STATUES 157

them was so tall that it provided shade for the thirty men of the
expeditionary corps during a halt.

ining the plain from Mount Toatoa at a moment when the
light was favourable, Mrs Routledge perceived that the statues,
which might have scemed scattered at random, marked sections of
roads. Traces of them, sometimes scarcely distinguishable, could be
seen to lead away from the quarry in four different directions.
These roads, which had probably been used for the transportation
of the statues, were slightly sunken and bordered by low banks.
There is no justification for the belicf that they were triumphal
avenues planned to give access to the holy of holies of the quarry.
If such had been the natives’ intention, the statues would have been
more symmetrically spaced out, No more orderly arrangement is
discernible than in the neighbourhood of the quarry.

The isolated statues are not all placed abng more or less hypo-
thetical avenues. There are fourteen scattered about the island in
positions where their presence is hard to explain. One of them, of
imposing dimensions, is stretched on its back, far from any habita-
tion, on the northern slope of Mount Rano-aroi, We were surprised
to discover another perched on the summit of Mount Teatenga.
One solitary statue stands a short distance from the Vai-mata aha
in a part of the island to which its transport must have presented
eink difficulties, It may very well have been abandoned just
before reaching the platform that was to scrve it as a base.

The function of these isolated statues is obscure. Some may have
formed part of mausoleums that have now vanished, Others may
have been colossal boundary posts—this, at any rate, is the rle of
certain stone images or ## on Tahiti. But even if we accept the
tradition based on this analogy, the small number of these boundary
statues does not accord with the inextricable network of tribal and
family frontiers.

The first interpretation that springs to mind when secking to

fathom the significance of the great statues is to d them as

images of deities worshipped by the ancient Easter Islanders. Rog-

geveen was so convinced of their being idols that he believed he

could see traces of continued religious veneration in the islanders’

attitude towards them. ‘The natives,’ he writes, ‘squatted on their
F

--- PAGE 179 ---
158 EASTER ISLAND

heels, bowed their heads, and alternately lowered and raised their
joined palms.’

No outward sign of any religious observances was noted by other
voyagers, The natives sometimes expressed vexation when visitors
walked over the mausolcums, but these indiscretions never caused
them any real anger.

Modern natives, questioned as to the purpose of the statues, said
that they were erected merely to decorate the mausoleums, This was
also the explanation given to the missionaries by Easter Islanders
who had been brought up in the ancient traditions.

The great architectural enterprises of the Polynesians often con-
tain an element of vanity and rivalry, a very keen desire to astonish
and outdo the neighbours. Today this competitive spirit finds ex-
pression in an urge to produce wooden statues than other
people. Malinowski observed in Melanesia the same need to exag-
gerate the size of ritual or display objects—ceremonial axes, for
example, There can be no doubt that the colossal dimensions of the
statues were the expression of a similar mentality.

' The ease with which tufa lends itsclf to sculpture, together with
vanity and the spirit of emulation, may explain the appearance and
proportions of the statues, but not their origin and primary signifi-
cance. The first question to be answered is whether these busts with
the disdainful pout were really idols. The names of several of them
are still known to the present generation. Captain Cook already
made a list of them. None of these names are those of a Polynesian
god, and many are descriptive terms—such as ‘Twisted Neck’,
*Tattooed Onc’, ‘Stinker’, etc. . . .

Now, Polynesians have a habit of giving proper names to all the
precious or remarkable objects that surround them. The statues
cannot have escaped this tendency, unless their names commemor-
ate deified ancestors. Cook was struck by the fact that many of these
names were followed by the epithet ariki, meaning ‘chief’. He
deduced from it that these busts or moai were monuments to the
dead. His supposition was only partially correct. On the Marquesas
Islands, whose civilization has so many points of contact with that
of Easter Island, the statues dominating the terraces of the sanctu-
aries re; ted famous chicfs or priests whose spirits had entered
the ranks of the tribe's tutelary deities, It must have been the same

--- PAGE 180 ---
THE GREAT STATUES 159

on our island. Its monuments were erected towards the close of an
evolution the main phases of which may be traced in Central Poly-
nesia. The rectangular platforms of the Tuamotu sanctuaries,
which, like those of Easter Island, are called ahu, are surmounted
at the rear by slabs of stone which are sometimes given a vaguely
anthropomorphic shape. Those with an anthropomorphic outline
are called tii, a word employed by the Tahitians and Marquesans to
designate every human image. The central stele, which is the most
important, is called the tapao ariki, ‘the sign of the chief’. Two
slabs of stone planted in the forecourt of the sanctuary (marae)
served as back-rests for the chiefs and were analogous with those on
the ahu, against which the gods and the ancestors leaned. These
stones were eventually looked upon as vessels into which the spirits
entered when they were invoked by the priests. This was doubtless
the a played by the Easter statues.

The sanctity of the statues was, therefore, temporary and
depended on rites that caused the advent of the deities. In the ordin-
ary way, the image was simply an ornament, a lifeless block of
stone. When, for lack of worshippers, the gods and ancestors were
deprived of sacrifices, the images that were no longer visited finally
lost all religious significance and ceased to be the object of any cult.
They became noa—profane.

Many people, even in scientific circles, refuse to admit that these
statues are the work of the Polynesian ancestors of the present-day
Easter Islanders. The most fantastic hypotheses have been advanced
. to explain their presence on this little island. Some writers have not
hesitated to ride roughshod over geological data and invent imagin-
ary continents, whose subsequent disappearance they attribute to
terrible cataclysms. Others have sought the origin of these colossi
successively in Egypt, India, Korea, and Melanesia. Historical
novels have been cooked up to describe the invasion of Easter Island
and the destruction of its civilization by warrior peoples. These far-
fetched parallels and this dramatic vision of the past possess such
powers of attraction that no scientific proof (I fear) wl dispel the
enigmas of Easter Island as they appear to dreamers—whether or
not they are specialists in archaeology!
There is no mystery about the relative age of the statues. They

--- PAGE 181 ---
160 EASTERK ISLAND

surmounted mausoleums which the Easter Islanders continued to
build until the middle of last century. They cannot, therefore, be
considered independently of the chres, which were still in use
less than a bastced years ago.

Anyone who observes the statues with an impartial cye is struck
by the cleanness of the angles, the polish of the surfaces, and the
precision of the details. The tempests that have flailed these colossi,
the countless rains that have washed them, the winds that have
lashed them, would surely have made greater changes in the surface
of the tufa in which they were carved, if the action of all these
atmospheric agents had gone on for as long as had been claimed.

This geological argument is amply confirmed by other observa-
tions of an archacological nature. The stone slab supporting one of
the statues on Te-peu aku rests on courses of stone identical in every
way with those that form the foundations of modern houses.
The men who erected this aw must, therefore, have lived in huts
in no way different from those seen by visitors to the island prior
to 1870.

The analogies of style between the stone statues and the wooden
figurines testify to the fact that the two types of image were pro-
duced by one and the same people. The Easter Islanders continue to
respect the traditional forms in carving the figurines, and it is
impossible, on the onc hand, to admit that the wooden statuettes
are more or less recent, while, on the other, asserting that the tufa
statues are immensely ancient.

The basalt bust now at the British Museum is without a doubt
the finest example of Easter Island sculpture. It comes from the
village of Orongo, where it was the object of a special cult at the
time of the feast of the bird-man. Far from appearing to our
informants as the relic of an unknown civilization, this statue was
to their minds a god that had participated in ceremonies still cele-
brated by their own great-grandparents.

A descriptive, illustrated catalogue of all the statues still on the
island would doubtless facilitate their classification and perhaps
reveal features that would enable us to reconstruct the stages passed
through by this monumental art, which appears at first sight 30
uniform. Travellers and scientists who visited the island, occupied
by more urgent tasks, omitted to carry out this census, on which

--- PAGE 182 ---
THE GREAT STATUES 161

their successors could have worked at Icisure. It is therefore on the
nese of reat lete data o, Vaan riser rg recently pt

icm Of a an ic great statucs, c
the ee of eae of have dealt with this question, Giinther is
convinced that the bulkier, clumsier and more archaic-looking ahu
statues are older than those on Mount Rano-raraku. Among the
volcano statues, those ine ec eee rs Cae
spread out along the external slopes. The suggestion is that
statues were Eetcacecd to be send on the mausoleums, then—
after this practice had passed out of fashion—they were merely put
up, for reasons unknown, in the vicinity of the quarry. My col-
league Lavachery, who has studied the statues in situ, holds the
cepa opinion. Simply as an nf a he has put forward the
following chronological schema: The first statues are those that
never left their niches. They correspond to a period during which
the sculptors were, so to speak, getting their hands in. the
statues were taken down and crected on the outskirts of the quarry.
Encouraged by their success, the Easter Islanders transported the
first statues to Tonga-riki ahu, which is nearest the quarry. From
then on, the practice of placing the statucs on the mausoleums
became general. The volcano sculptors created ‘a mass-production
type with a maximum height of twelve feet that could be tran-
Sported in any direction’. Then came the fifth and last period, cor-
responding to the advent of the Europeans in the eighteenth cen-
aie For Tack of orders, the sculptors did not finish the works they
had begun, and as the result of the disasters that struck the island
monumental sculpture disappeared.

The differences between the aw statues and those of the quarry,
which have been enumerated above and which consist primarily in
the absence of eyes from the latter, are an important fact that must
be borne in mind; but it is i tees heen is commonly
supposed—they have a chronological value; or whether the style of
the statues simply depended u biked lines me

Apart from differentiation bare ¢ two groups, the statues
do not vary much amongst themselves. The uniformity within each

series seems, of itself, to indicate that this monumental art flour-
ished for only a short period—a few centuries at the most.

--- PAGE 183 ---
162 EASTER ISLAND

Volcanic tufa is a sort of earth bound by the presence of fragments
and nodules of stone. It is friable and easily carved. The modern
sculptors consider this material easier to work than wood. With
nothing but an axe they cut out a large block of tufa in a day and
in a few hours transform it into replicas of the great statues. Mrs
Routledge possibly goes too far when she estimates the time
required for a team of sculptors to carve one of the Rano-raraku
statues at a fortnight. Her assessment is entirely hypothetical, but it
represents a salutary reaction against those a have exaggerated
the duration of this task. It must not be forgotten that the quarry
workers had not only to fashion the statue, but to carve from the
cliff the block to which they were going to give human shape. The
depth of the crypts and caverns which they opened in the side of
Mount Rano-raraku testifies to considerable effort, intensified by _
the primitive tools they employed. They used great mallets, vaguely
reminiscent of the Chellean hand-axes, which were dressed by
striking off large flakes and tapered to a point. It was with these
picks that they attacked the walls of tufa, but to finish off the statues
they required more delicate implements—stone gravers, about a
foot long, which are found in large numbers on the surface of the
island. These instruments were so easy to handle that a shaft was
superfluous. While pickaxes abound in the quarry, these chisels are
rarer. They were probably too valuable to leave by the statues.
Writers have repeatedly stated that the transportation of the
statues was a superhuman task presupposing a population denser
than the island could have supported. They have talked of weights
of a hundred tons, even of five hundred tons. In dealing with this
problem, the first point to establish is the real weight of the statues.
This has been greatly exaggerated, like everything to do with Easter
Island. The enormous head brought back by Pierre Loti and toda
at the Musée de l’Homme, Paris, weighs only twenty-four pa Pe
weight. Taking the specific weight of the Rano-raraku tufa as a
basis, we tried to determine the weight of the statues that were
transported to the ahw: the result of the calculation was five to six
tons. The volcano statues were certainly three, four, and even five
times heavier; but even so, their transportation would not be
beyond the limits of human capacities—especially as the distances
they had to go were comparatively short. As for the unfinished

--- PAGE 184 ---
THE GREAT STATUES 163

monsters in the 2 were perhaps no more than huge
petroglyphs in nit plkice the hese ort figures in European
cathedrals. If it had been intended to transport them elsewhere, the
sculptors would not have chosen almost inaccessible spots in which
to carve them.

We shall never be certain of the means by which the Easter
Islanders transported these bulky and crumbling masses. The prob-
lem is complicated by the fact that Easter Island has always been
short of timber. One hesitates to accept the idea that the twisted
trunks of the roro-miro or the other shrubs that clung to the slopes
of the volcano could have been turned into rollers or skids. How-
ever, the natives did not depend exclusively on the scanty local flora,
but had at their disposal the driftwood Seas by the sea. The
pieces of wood from which made their dance paddles and
their big clubs were large enough to provide levers or the runners
of the ‘fids,

Strong ropes were needed to haul the statues. The Easter
Islanders made them with the fibres of the paper mulberry, which
hey probably cultivated on a large scale.

If we admit that the Easter Islanders had the timber to construct
skids, and ropes with which to haul the statues, the mystery is
reduced to a question of labour-force and energy. Our islanders
were not the only Polynesians to raise and cart heavy masses. The
Marquesans incorporated in the masonry of their sanctuaries blocks
weighing more ten tons. They were dragged down sloping

Cylihaoly tabs: hat og ag ligee Retr oe sb ees
muscle power. tu $s ren the task of

In the Tonga archipelago there is a monumental gateway, the
Trilith, whose popularity rivals that of the Easter Island statues.
The same jentific fantasies surround this monument,
which has also been attributed to vanished civilizations, The date at
which this gateway was erected is known, however, as well as the
name of the chief who supervised the work, and the technique
employed in its construction. The lintel resting on the two pillars

weighs fifteen tons. It was brought bows Goel 8 aoe eae
sviphoe pga ahd aa phen a the tops

--- PAGE 185 ---
164 EASTER ISLAND

of the two uprights. On reaching this height, it was dropped into
the two mortices waiting to receive it.

The logs which the Maoris took from the forests to fashion their
dugout canoes often weighed much more than the Easter Island
statues. The explanation the Easter Islanders gave a German lieut-
enant of the manner in which the statues were transported along
the slopes of the quarry, although unfortunately rather vague, is
strikingly reminiscent of the method employed by the Maoris.

The main difficulty was not how to shift the statue, but how to
avoid breaking it in the process. It was this consideration that led
Captain Vandesande of the ‘Mercator’ to choose a basalt statue,
fhe: than a tufa bust, for the Musée du Cinquantenaire.

Our informants believed that the statues were moved in a dream,
thanks to the magic power of Tu‘u-koihu. This miraculous ex-
planation doubtless expresses the secret desire of those who were
harnessed to the statues and dragged them across the stony soil of
their island. It would, however, be a mistake to project into the
midst of the Pacific the picture with which we are familiar in con-
nexion with the construction of the Egyptian pyramids. The statues
were not put in position by gangs of slaves, but by free men, happy
to take part in an enterprise carried out for the greater glory of their
family or tribe. We must imagine the joyous tumult of the festivals
when thinking of this effort. The heads of lineages who wished to
raise a new bust on their ahu undoubtedly organized feasts that
they prepared long beforehand. To this end, they extended the area
of their fields and accumulated reserves by placing the products of
land and sea under a tabu; in a word, they mobilized all their
resources to pay for the anticipated aid. On the agreed day, groups
of relatives and friends could be seen converging on the volcano.
Fires were burning in the ovens, the feast hut was full of bere
The guests harnessed themselves to the statue and strained thei
muscles to the sound of cries and — recited by the priests to
facilitate their task. A half-serious, half-humorous rivalry turned
the undertaking into an immense pleasure party. These tufa giants
were not shifted at one go: months, perhaps years, lay between the
stages on their journey from the quarry to the west coast
mausoleums.

It is, however, odd that the Easter Islanders should not have been

--- PAGE 186 ---
THE GREAT STATUES 165

able to give the missionaries information that would have dispelled
the whole mystery. Why did the natives explain the transportation
of the statues by myths, instead of giving us the technical details we
expected from them? This is really puzzling, and one cannot help
suspecting that the first missionaries were incurious and indifferent.
The traditions are not entirely devoid of concrete details, however.
They allude to the embankments and ramps by means of which the
statues were brought to the level of the platform on which they
were to be placed. One informant also spoke to us of wooden levers,
crushed potatoes, and round stones which helped these heavy masses
to slide along. He also showed us a hill behind the Te-pito-to-kura
ahu that was linked to the ahu by an earth-bank along which the
Paro statue was moved. The cylinders of red tufa were rolled down
an artificial slope built up of stones and boulders. The great volcano
statues were erected by a roughly similar method. Behind some of
them Mrs Routledge found the mound of stones that had supported
them while they were being raised into a vertical position.

If Easter Island traditions are yague and confused in respect of
the transportation of the statues, the situation is the same with
regard to other aspects of the ancient culture. Although their grand-
parents were sill living in the Stone Age, none of the modern
islanders will admit that the stone adze blades they find at every
step could have been used to carve the wooden images. In their
eagerness to adopt a new culture, they have rejected even the
memory of the past.

Our thirst for plausible explanations must not cause us to lose
sight of the incredible difficulties the Easter Islanders overcame in
order to transport their statues. Their magical interpretations be-
come understandable when one sees Rikiriki ahu perched between
a steep slope and a dizzy cliff!

The presence of a soft, easily-cut tufa, with a tendency to harden
when exposed to the air, certainly favoured the development of this
statuary. On the other hand, the custom of raising images of the
dead on the mausoleums is anterior to the discovery and coloniza-
tion of the island. When the Easter Islanders immigrated to it they
already possessed an artistic tradition that may have been limited to
wood-carving. The absence of trees on the island on which chance
had cast them compelled them to adapt their traditional techniques

F*

--- PAGE 187 ---
166 EASTER ISLAND

toa different and more easily worked material. After some tentative
efforts, they succeeded in evolving a new style that became fixed
shortly after its birth. It impr itself upon them so deeply that
it became part of the melancholy landscape of the island.

Quite recently an American anthropologist, Dr Sahlins, has
drawn attention to social and economic factors that help us to
understand the extraordinary flowering of Easter Island statuary.
The Polynesians who most closely resemble the natives of Easter
Island in language and cultur. tis to say, the natives of New
Zealand, Mangareva, the Marquesas, and the Hawaiian Islands—
had a strongly stratified social structure. Each of these societies com-
prised a whole gamut of groups and sub-groups (known scientific-
ally as ‘ramages’) that were theoretically interrelated and linked by
real or fictitious genealogical ties. The heads of these groups were
more or less noble according to the degree of their relationship with
the senior branch, the direct issue of a common ancestor from
whom was descended a chicf or ariki, a word Europeans haye
translated as ‘king’. Corresponding to this type of socicty was an
economic system based on exchanges and spectacular distribution of
goods and food. The chiefs disposed of the production surplus,
which they redistributed in the shape of feasts or payment to groups
of craftsmen or gangs of labourers who, on their instructions,
carried out large-scale undertakings such as the building of ni
the terracing of mountain slopes, the digging of canals, and the
construction of large canoes for sailing on the high seas. Certain
collective enterprises, such as fishing, were likewise organized
the chicfs on the same basis. On Hawaii thousands of men might
be employed simultancously on a common task. Some occupations
were the prerogative of social groups of which the chief became the
patron. Their services were paid for by gifts of food or other goods.
The chief's right of distraint on a part of the production stimulated
the spirit of enterprise and communal effort within these societies.

Everything we know about the social organization of Easter
Island sts that the above system existed there in an almost
identical shape. The chiefs had, ‘ore, the means of mobilizi
the members of their groups and assigning to them the tasks whi
they considered useful. Now, local conditions rendered these tasks
much less numerous than in other islands. On Easter Island collec-

--- PAGE 188 ---
THE GREAT STATUES 167

tive fishing never acquired the importance it had elsewhere, because
of the absence of a reef or a lagoon that would have encouraged it;
lack of timber reduced boat-building to negligible proportions;
there were no forests to clear; and attempts to establish an irrigation
— were fruitless. The Easter Islanders’ spirit of enterprise
therefore turned towards the only domain in which it was possible
for them to expend their energy: the cult of the gods and the
ancestors. The Diets, who had vast resources at their disposal, em-
ployed them in maintaining and paying groups of craftsmen who
carved statues to ornament the mausoleums belonging to the various
lineages. Teams of considerable size could be mobilized to transport
the statues and erect them on the ahu.

This would explain how so much effort could be concentrated on
a single activity and why monumental sculpture made such strides.
The latter was also favoured by the existence on the island of such
an easily worked material as tufa. Nor must considerations of the
prestige and glory of the chiefs and their groups be Sig 2 What
we do not know is the part played by the religious factor among
the various motives behind the particular evolution of Polynesian
art that took place on Easter Island.

One glance at the leaves the impression of an abrupt cessa-
tion of work. Nearly a hundred statues have remained unfinished
and others were abandoned at the moment of leaving the workshop.
These signs of great activity coming to a sudden halt inevitably
Suggest a cataclysm or a tragedy that threw the life of the island
into confusion. The natives are still vaguely conscious that some
disaster paralysed the army of sculptors. Their version of events
runs as follows:

The seep Oe of the quarry were fed by men who went fishing
for them. One day these men went to Kikirimariu, where they
dived into an undersea cavity to catch a crayfish, for it was there
that it dwelt with its body, its tail and its claws. The divers
returned to the surface and said: ‘This crayfish cannot be caught,
it is much too big.’ Other men dived in their turn, but they did
not come back. Those who had discovered this great crayfish left
it and returned to the place where they usually fish, caught some

--- PAGE 189 ---
168 EASTER ISLAND

crayfish and distributed them among the sculptors. Then they set
about knotting a large net for the enormous crayfish they had
found.

Six men and again six men perished because of this crayfish,
this crayfish with the long tail. The fishermen went back to
where it was. The people they met on the way said to them: ‘Six
men and then another six men went in search of this crayfish and
are dead.’ The fishermen replied: ‘Yes, but we shall kill the cray-
fish.’ The three young men entered the sea and swam to a point
above the cavity in which the crayfish dwelt. They spread their
net and the youngest said: ‘I shall dive first, you will follow me
and drive the crayfish into the net.’ The young man opened his
net into which the others drove the crayfish. They took a firm
grip on the net and pulled it up to the surface of the water. There
were three of them, and the crayfish made four. As they landed
on the beach they uttered a loud shout: ‘Eeeee, ko tetu, ko te ura
rarape nut\’ [ Eeeee, how big it is, the crayfish with the long
tail!] They took the crayfish, and everyone came to admire it.
Then they slung it on their backs and carried it to the sculptors.

The sculptors called an old sorceress and said to her: ‘Light the
oven to cook the crayfish; how big it is, the crayfish with the long
tail!’ The old woman lit the fire and also put some potatoes to
cook, which are good to eat with crayfish. Then she said to the
men: ‘When everything is cooked take the food out of the oven,
but leave some for me.’ “All right,’ said the sculptors.

The old sorceress went to see her brother and stayed talking to
him while the crayfish was cooking in the oven. When it was
ready, the sculptors opened the oven and ate it all. They thought
no more about the old woman and forgot her completely. They
devoured the crayfish, distributed the scraps, and went back to
work. The statue they were carving was called Tokanga. They
had already finished the hands, the face and the neck, and were
about to detach it from its matrix in order to take it to the Mat-
airai au at Vinapu.

The woman came back to the oven from which the great cray-
fish had been taken out. There was nothing left but the shell. She
cried out: “Where is my crayfish?’ The men replied: ‘There is
none left, it is finished. We forgot you and that is why there is

--- PAGE 190 ---
THE GREAT STATUES 169

none left.’ The old woman recited a spell. She said: ‘Statues that
are upright, fall down! It is the fault of the great crayfish, of the
crayfish with the long tail of which you left nothing for me.
Never again shall you steal my food. Statues, remain still for
ever.’ All the statues fell, for the sorceress’s bosom was full of

anger.

re quarry, struck by an interdict, remained under the sorceress’s
spell.

7 as we have every reason to suppose, manufacture of the statues
was the concern of a guild of sculptors, a war of extermination or
even an epidemic brought by some European ship would be enough
to explain the desertion of the workshops.

Another myth explains the overthrow of the Tonga-riki ahu
statues. A magician, who had likewise been excluded from a ban-
quet, caused them to fall down by pushing with his foot the central
beam of the hut in which he had received hospitality.

If the cause of the cessation of work in the quarry has been for-
gotten, the events leading to the destruction of the ahu statues still
live in the memory of the natives. They know that most of them
were thrown down during a series of inter-tribal wars waged at the
end of the eighteenth or the beginning of the nineteenth centuries.

At the end of the eighteenth century the west coast ahu were still
surmounted by their statues, but Forster—and two years later, M.
de Langle of tbe La Pérouse expedition—obseryed that in the south
of the island several statues had been thrown down and that the
platforms on which others stood were half in ruins. The busts
round Hanga-roa Bay were knocked down before 1815. The statues
of the neighbouring Tahai Bay were still upright in 1837, for
Admiral Dupetit-Thouars Nese as he sailed past, ‘a platform
on which were set four red statues, equidistant from one another,
their summits covered with white stones or capitals of this colour.’
In 1866, when the missionaries settled on the island, there was no
longer a single statue in position on any mausoleum. What had hap-
pened during these thirty years?

The folklore texts that were dictated to me were full of the
memory of inter-tribal struggles waged before the arrival of the
Whites. The victor satisfied his lust for destruction and humiliated

--- PAGE 191 ---
170 EASTER ISLAND

the vanquished by hurling down the statues on his ancestral mau-
soleum. Such protanation provoked reprisals. Every turn of fortune
brought with it fresh assaults upon the great silent images. Old men
who died at the beginning of the present century told their grand-
children that in the time of their Less the island was filled with
the crash of falling statues. One of them, who died in 1915, remem-
bered that the Paro statue had been thrown to the ground when he
was a child as the result of the following incident: a woman called
Tupa-hotu had been killed and eaten by the Tu‘u people. Her son
avenged her by hunting down in a cavern thirty oe belonging
to the district in which the outrage had been committed. Paro was
the victim of this vendetta. Ropes were passed round his neck, and
a band of warriors heaved the statue over on to its face. Tepano
knew the name of the individual who decapitated the Papara ahu
and the nature of the sickness with which he was afflicted because
of his sacrilege. These conflicts were known as ‘the wars of the
throwing down of the statues’.

Violent as was the iconoclastic fury of this period, it merely
completed the work of time and preceding generations.

--- PAGE 192 ---
CHAPTER X

Feasts

The Hareauti—T he feast of the boat

Tue Easter Islanders seemed to me to be conscious of the mono-
tony of their insular existence and sometimes to suffer under it. The
excitement that seizes them every time an unexpected event occurs
to disturb their tranquillity is doubtless a manifestation of their
secret joy at the prospect of escaping from boredom, if only for a
few instants. In days gone by, inter-tribal wars gave spice to life by
filling it with violent emotions. In peaceful periods frequent feasts
provided the islanders with distractions of which their descendants
are almost entirely deprived. They were no doubt organized by
chiefs of lineages or extended families anxious to consolidate or
enhance their prestige. One feast led to another, because the gifts
received created an obligation to return them. The memory of these
festivities, in which their ancestors competed in display and gener-
osity, has been kept alive in the island’s traditions; they are a sub-
ject about which the old men like to talk at length to those who
question them.

In the Easter Island dialect, the word for a feast is koro. This is
identical with the term employed in the old days to address one’s
father or a man belonging to his generation. ‘O koro e,’ “O my
father,’ they used to say. These words are not simply homonyms,
but joined by a semantic link, for a koro was more specifically a
_ feast given by a young man in honour of his father or father-in-law.

It was perhaps merely by extension of its original meaning that the
word koro came to be applied to every festival involving the distri-
bution of food, as was notably the case when, after the harvest, a
rich landowner organized celebrations for the friends and relatives
who had lent him their assistance. Koro seem to have been especi-
ally characterized by gifts of food. Potatoes, yams and other food-
_stuffs heaped on trestles demonstrated the wealth and generosity of
the person or ms giving the feast. This practice is found in
almost identical forms among the Maori of New Zealand, whose

17i

--- PAGE 193 ---
i72 EASTER ISLAND

culture offers so many analogies with that of the ancient Easter
Islanders.

The festival known as paina doubtless formed part of the cycle of
mortuary ceremonies, It was organized in honour of a father, and
perhaps also of a brother, a few years after their death. The dead
man, whose virtues were celebrated, and wg? a it was doubr-
less hoped to pacify, was represented by a sort o! jgure—a paina
rah a se pri or reeds Auten wihbokciathe The
head and limbs were constructed separately. Tufts of rushes took
the place of hair; the eyes were represented by discs cut from the
top of a skull, with black shells as pupils, and shaded by eyebrows
of feathers. Black painting from forehead to feet reproduced male
tattooing. These effigies, which were seen by Gonzalez and La
Pérouse in the cighteenth century, measured from nine to twelve
feet. They stood behind the ahx on positions marked by circles of
stones, which may still be observed near ancient mausoleums.

The organizer surrounded the cfhigy with chickens and food,
which he made ready to distribute according to the rules of a
ceremonial whose details have sortiaely beet lost. He then
climbed into the paina and addressed to the gathering, through the
hole corresponding to the mouth, a long speech glecifying the dead
man’s memory and extolling his own generosity. Moved by his
panegyric, the crowd burst into tears and intoned the

ncral laments. At a given moment the orator thrust his hand out
of the effigy’s mouth and displayed a cock that he held at arm’s
length. Tradition has it that he bit its comb, but we do not know
for what %

One of Gonzalez’s licutenants gives these effigies the name
kopeka, a word meaning ‘vengeance’. No doubt his informants
wished to tell him Eattey were holding a ceremony in honour of
“erpea pees zal in battle or in some other way, and that

simultan performed the rites of vengeance.

What was the significance of koro properly seaalleds that is to
ia feasts given in Rone ot a sere who was still alive?

ling to statements of present: Easter Islanders,
were a public manifestation of rade stomapenc
father-in-law or a mother-in-law. obligation to celebrate koro
was not lost until the beginning of the century. When I asked Vic-

--- PAGE 194 ---
FEASTS 173

toria Rapahango for details of this curious custom she burst into
tears, because, as she explained to me, my en uiry had reminded
her of the koro which her brother had celebrated some twenty years
ago—in about 1915. This brother—whose memory I had voluntarily
called up—had died at sea, and Victoria felt it right to pay him the
tribute of her tears.

Anyone intending to hold a koro had to set to work well in ad-
vance in order to get together the three hundred fowls required for
this ceremony. Na y his taina, that is, his brothers and cousins,
helped him by bringing their quota. He also had to gather together
foodstuffs, either by extending his area of cultivation, or by calling
on the good offices of his friends or relatives. Then he commis-
sioned a chanter to compose chants for the occasion and have them
performed by a chorus of men and women. If he accepted the com-
mission, the choirmaster (Aats) reccived a gift of an ovenful of
food, which sealed the contract.

On the day of the feast, the food that had been accumulated was
heaped up on trestles, and the fowls were attached in groups of ten
toa Sad: stretched between two stakes. The fowls provided by
relatives, ticd in the same way, formed a separate row, at right-
angles to the first.

The organizer of the feast a ched the motuha, that is, the
beneficiary of the feast—his father or father-in-law—and gave him
a chicken. The motuha quickly handed it to a member of his
family. Then he went up to the two rows of chickens, untied them,
and distributed them among certain groups of relatives. Some of
the chickens were presented to the motuha’s brother, who threw
them on his back and performed a dance. The motuha also handed
chickens to his wife for her to distribute among her relations. Those
who received a chicken immediately gave it away, so that the fowls
circulated from one person to another, The obligatory nature of
these exchanges was expressed in the belief that a chicken could not
be caten until it had changed hands five times.

Those who had received ts had to return them on the
occasion of another koro, so that sooner or later the man who had
ruined himself by his generosity was able to restock his farmyard
with the gifts he received in return.

After exchanges, the ovens were opened and the food taken

--- PAGE 195 ---
174 EASTER ISLAND

out and distributed among the guests. The motuha was obliged to
offer two ovenfuls of food, one to the organizer of the feast, the
other to his assistants.

The feast was enlivened by songs and dances. Victoria eg a
hango dictated to me the fragment of a text composed for her
brother’s koro:

10 te korongo mai nei Here is the feast sung
I Moana-vera-vera-ra-tahai, In Moana-vera-vera-ra-tahai,
Rima turu, turu. Hands raising, raising.

The celebration of a Roro flattered the vanity both of the organ-
izer of the feast and its beneficiary. The latter was its hero, but the
former acquired prestige by displaying his generosity and wealth.

_If the father was satished with the homage paid him, he thanked
his son by reciting the following verse ad nauseam in a sing-
fons voice: ‘O my son, you have given a great koro for your
ather.’

When the last potatoes had been eaten, the guests dispersed,
praising the merits and filial piety of their host.

The description of a koro I have given here will not satisfy ethno-
graphers anxious for more information about the rules governing
these distributions. The confused recollections of modern Easter *
Islanders give us a glimpse of a whole system of contractual gifts
analogous to those described in connexion with other Pacific cul-
tures. We catch a hint of psychological mechanisms at work among
the ancient Easter Islanders identical with those which, among their
distant relatives of Western Polynesia and the Maori, associate the
distribution of gifts with notions of prestige and bestow on the fact
of giving and receiving the character of an obligation that is not
only social, but also mystical,

The festivals called hareauti were held in autumn and winter. If
our sources are to be believed, they were essentially profane in char-
acter, for they were organized by individuals in whom ambition or
vanity inspired the wish to increase their prestige by a display of
generosity.

Some time before the solemn day, a hut had to be erected in a
suitable spot that served as a club, a dance hall, and a reception

--- PAGE 196 ---
FEASTS 175

room. The that formed the skeleton of these constructions
were y preserved after use.

The young men and girls whose dances and chants, along with a
substantial banquet, constituted the principal attraction o} the fes-
tivities, resided in these long houses for several weeks beforchand
in order to rehearse.

We have spoken of these enjoyable periods of residence in the
feast huts during our discussion of the years of adolescence. The
youngsters played, sang and made their first acquaintance with the
deli & of love.

¢ intimacy was interrupted when the guests arrived on the
agreed date and took their i in the house that had been pre-
pared for them, Great importance was, of course, attached to the
presence of a chief, who added lustre to the feast and gave it a
religious consecration. The tabus surrounding ariki obliged the host
amy his guests to observe certain rules of ceremonial. Nothing un-
clean must defile the interior of the hut. A story tells of the indigna-
tion of Tu‘u-ko-ihu, who, finding a child’s excrement in a koro
hut, refused to eat the bananas that had been offered him and
immediately left a place where his sacred person would have been

luted.

We will let Brother Eyraud, an cye-witness, describe the rig-out

of a crowd attending a koro.

Everyone turns up, [writes Eyraud] in all his most precious
things. On this occasion the most eccentric apparel makes its
appearance. . . . They wear everything they can get hold of.
People paint themselves with extra care and call upon the services
of a hand skilled in fixing colours and sees capricious lines on
the face. . . . On feast days an enormous bark is inserted
in the lobe of the ear. [ The head-dresses were no less picturesque.
In addition to feather diadems, the missionary lists hats decorated
with buttons, calabashes, half a gourd, and even a sea-bird
whose opened carcase had been more or less thoroughly cleaned
out.

On their great days, [ writes Eyraud in the same letter
dress, praise load Absa ise evi ing that pre
how be attached to them. The man who has been able to get hold

--- PAGE 197 ---
176 "EASTER ISLAND

of a dress puts on a dress; if he has two of them, he puts on two.
The woman who can lay her hands on a pair of trousers, a waist-
coat or an overcoat, decks herself out in them with all possible

elegance.

This grotesque display is one of the fruits of the island’s decad-
ence. Once upon a time this same crowd, draped in red and yellow
painted tapa cloaks, their bodies perfumed with turmeric, must
have displayed a genuine elegance.

“They get into two lines and sing.’ Such is the summary descrip-
tion given by a witness of one of these hareauti.

We know just as little about the other festivals. The one called
puke was simultaneously a game and a magical test. The children
gathered handfuls of seaweed. They handed these to the adults,
who threw them at the children while the latter ran away and tried
to dodge them. Those who were struck by a handful of seaweed
were supposedly destined for a premature death.

Kaunga is the name of a dance associated with a particular feast
about which we know almost nothing. The young men and girls
danced in Indian file, each girl preceded by a boy, on a narrow strip
of ground paved with pebbles. The dancers held little dance paddles
that they moved in time to the music as they advanced and retreated
gracefully. The parents took no part in the ceremony, of which
they were merely spectators. We were informed that many mar-
riages were decided at this feast, for young men and girls made a
great effort to appear at their most elegant.

The sailing ips that called at Easter Island, at long intervals, in
the course of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, made a deep
impression on the natives. This is proved by the numerous depic-
tions of sailing vessels painted on the stone slabs of the Orongo
houses and in the cave of Ana-kai-tangata.

The activities, postures and language of a ship’s crew, which the
natives observed during these visits, became the theme of a panto-
mime or ballet that was performed every year on a mound of earth
(miro-o'one—‘the earth ship’), representing the strangers’ vessel.
The last time this performance was given—twenty years ago—a
gang of mataroa (sailors) hauled on imaginary ropes while the

--- PAGE 198 ---
FEASTS 177

captain, acted by the catechist Timoteo Pakarati, gave the orders,
cursing and spitting out his quid.

The following is one of the songs composed on this occasion; it
was also considered to have been an improvisation to welcome a
man by the name of To‘orangi of the Eapaea lineage who came
from Chile as a sailor:

A To‘orangi a Eapaea e, O To‘orangi of Eapaea,

A te kapu mai hiva e, He that comes from abroad,
Ka hakaava ro They are pushing forward
I te kaukau hakarava The yards

E To‘orangi a Eapaea e. O To‘orangi of Eapaea.
Ka hakatata haro They tilt

I te kaukau hakarava The yards

O To‘orangi o te miro. Of To‘orangi's ship.

Kahu a‘ava. The sail is inflated.

It is uncertain whether this feast perpetuates the memory of the
visit of one of the great eighteenth-century navigators or is merely
a game inspired by more recent contacts with the whites.

First Tepano told us the feast was an historical reconstruction of
the acts of piracy committed by Poie; then he changed his mind and
assured us that it commemorated the visit of Captain Cook. This
latter interpretation, which was accepted by Mrs Routledge, is very
doubtful. Why should the natives have commemorated Captain
Cook’s landing rather than that of the navigators who preceded
and followed him? Perhaps this pantomime dates no farther back
than the time of the whalers. :

However that may be, the game of the boat is not confined to
Easter Island. During his captivity on Penrhyn, Lemont was a
2 Seanad at a theatrical performance in which the wreck of his own

ip was enacted.

The Feast of the Boat is no longer performed, but on the first day
of the year the Easter Islanders dress in navy uniforms and go
through actions imitating the manoeuvres of a ship’s crew.

--- PAGE 199 ---
CHAPTER XI

Poetry, Music and Dancing

Lire cannot have lacked charm when the tribes were at peace.
Fishing and work in the fields alternated with the minor activities
of everyday existence to create a calm and happy atmosphere. The
Easter Islanders’ ancestors, from the fortunate islands of Central
Polynesia, left them a tradition of careless gaiety that has been
transmitted to their hybrid descendants. These emigrants also
bequeathed to them a love of music and an intense liking for the
sound and savour of words. Here again, Polynesian culture has
affinities with that of Ancient Greece.
The variation of syllables and their unexpected arrangement
sess particular charm for the Polynesian ear. The Easter Islan
love to repeat a word whose elements seem to them to form a new
and agreeable combination. This sensitiveness to phonetic nuances
is somctimes expressed in unforeseen ways. Following a raid on the
islet of Marotiri, the people of Tu‘u brought back some twenty
bho obd [ata inten ates remet ty
a teks Eels relations, A chief named Ohotakatore, who had
recognized among the dead an enemy called Han: ihi-tokerau,
said: ‘I want the body of this man with such a beautiful name.’
When he was refused this favour, Ohotakatore betrayed his own

tribe.

The smallest reefs, the slightest depressions in the the
most insigni inks entices Eee Gale jects, were
individualized by a proper name. This practice allowed a storyteller
to embellish his tale with long lists of names that may seem mono-
tonous to us, but which delighted his audience. Every movement af
a hero about the island afforded the opportunity for an intermin-
able recitation eee oe for this itinerary was described in
minute detail. If returned by the way he went, the list of
the places he passed was repeated.

In these little shut-in ie see worlds, every event became
significant and could provide material for a poetic composition.
Brother Eyraud’s sheep, which were stolen soon after his arrival

178

--- PAGE 200 ---
POETRY, MUSIC AND DANCING 179

and cooked at the first opportunity, were celcbrated in a short poem
sung in all keys for months on end. The smallpox that decimated
-the population became the subject of a song intended to enliven
bangucts und set the young people dancing.
This musical and literary form has not been entirely lost. We
collected a satirical improvisation that still enjoyed some popularity:
Rahi toke vie a Aru-manu-vie. Rahi stole the wife of Aru-manu-
ule.
Maitetu‘uapai toke mat ai At Maiteu uapai he took
1 te vie a Aru-manu-vie. The wife of Aru-manu-vie.
The crew of the Chilean ship ‘Araucano’ having proved less
generous than that of the *Baquedano’, the natives gave vent to
their resentment in the following chant:

E rakerake te Araukano, The ‘Araucano’ is bad,
Te nehenche te Pakedano. The ‘Baquedano’ is good.

The ancient bards established a scholarly classification of the
chanted poems, according to their character, The sacred chants were
hare-atua; the warlike pacans, a te hake-kakai, that is, poems ‘that
incite to battle’; the songs called ei were generally satirical in intent
and aimed chiefly at an unfaithful woman or a girl who paid no
attention to the love of some man. They were composed by special-
ists, learned in secret by a chorus, and sung on a feast day, to the

it embarrassment of the person they concerned. Lovers also
improvised songs in honour cbtbe beloved, and if the words or the
tune found favour, they were incorporated into the folklore of the
island. A few sera chants—unfortunately of recent date—are still

extant, With combined assistance of our informants we were
able to translate them—not always an easy matter, because of the
obscure allusions they contain.

Here, first of all, is a funcral lament:

E hata tae kava The stinking worms

E kaikai koe ia Tau-mahani Eat you, O Tau-mahani,

I te vie honui e. Woman of high lineage.

A woman of the Tupa-hotu tribe had been deserted by her hus-
rein in repented his action and came back at night, scratching
at :

--- PAGE 201 ---
180 EASTER ISLAND

Tupa-hotu rakerake, This tupa-hotu is bad,
Tae tangitangt rikiriki I shall not shed a single tear for
him.

Hove e kioe e nekuku mai nei It is perhaps a rat that scratches
A koiao ku tata hakahou mai Oh, it is he who has come
a. back...

A young girl leaves her lover’s arms at dawn. He sings. . .

E Miru, a ivi rari i te hupee, O Miru girl, you are dampened
to the bones by dew,

I te hupe hau a Rano-aroi. By the dew of the Rano-aroi.

Kae pakapaka I topa ro ai You won't be dry when you go
down to the shore

Kit te roto tatau mahute To soak the paper mulberry

Mo te nua hute pukao. To make the cloth for the ribbon
of your top-knot.

Another love poem is supposed to be recited by a girl whose
younger sister loves the same man as she does:

E Mea, a tino mamahi rua e ki O Mea, for your body the little

te iti, Ri te nui e. one and the big one are
fighting.
He tonga, te pua,repa hoa, It is winter, my friend, the
flower gives off its perfume,
Ka eo, ka co, ka kava nei. The flower is very fragrant.
He hora, te pua, repa hoa, It is summer, the flower, my
friend, é
Ka mariri mai to‘oku aro nei, Is withered on my breast, alas,
aue, aue. ;
Ku mataku mai a i te vie The older woman is afraid,
honui e,
He te kotaki mo haroa o te rei, Here is the wreath to hang an
0 too rei mata nei. ornament, the ornament is
your face.
He tou taina, e Mea e. O my brother, O Mea.

The following lines describe the efforts of a married woman shut
up by her jealous husband and digging a way out with her hands,
so that she can join her lover:

--- PAGE 202 ---
POETRY, MUSIC AND DANCING 181

E manu e, ka pari mai toto O Manu, my blood oozes
Hare keri ena aaku i te po, e When I dig under the house,

Manu e. O Manu.
E au tae kai i te kumara I do not eat the sweet potatoes
O tau korohua nei ko, Mae-te- Of this old man, Maca-te-
renga. renga.

The ancient music of Easter Island has almost entirely disap-
peared and been replaced by tunes from Tahiti and Chile. All that
remains are descriptions, such as this one from Pierre Loti’s Reflets
sur la sombre route:

They sing, the Maoris; they all sing beating their hands as if
they were making a dance rhythm. The women utter notes as
soft and fluty as those of birds. The men sometimes make small
falsetto voices, thin, quavering, and shrill. Sometimes, they pro-
duce cavernous sounds like the roars of enraged wild animals.
Their music is made of short and jerky phrases, ending in gloomy
vocalizations descending in minor tones. They seem to express
the surprise of being alive and also the sadness of life. Notwith-
standing, they sing in joy, in the childish joy of secing us, in the
pleasure of the small new things we bring them.

Loti is not the only one to have been moved by these songs. Other
voyagers have sought to put into words the impression they made
upon them. They were struck by the bass notes, by the unison, and
by the range of the voices. The women knelt and accompanied the
rhythm of their singing by swaying their bodies and moving their
hands, as they still do in church. A chorus leader gave the key, to
which all the singers tuned their voices. Thereupon, the song burst
forth, pure and sonorous, and its stirring cadence set the dancers in
motion. Sometimes the chorus was divided into two groups, each
comprising a row of men (pere) and a row of women (hi). They
sung the verses alternately under the direction of the leader (hatu),
who stood in the centre and juggled with a ceremonial paddle (0a).

There is no Polynesian society in which dancing is not the fav-
ourite pastime. It is still so on Easter Island, but fashions have
changed and no one bothers about the ancient dances. What the
young people want is a good gramophone with tangos, cuecas and

--- PAGE 203 ---
182 EASTER ISLAND

fox-trots. Then eyes begin to shine and the vigour of these supple
bodies is awakened. If anyone insists on seeing the dances of the
past, a girl or young man will execute a dance on one foot without
much skill or enthusiasm. Nevertheless, this hopping really is one
of the indigenous dances of the island. In 1838, when the ‘Venus’,
commanded by Admiral Dupetit-Thouars, put in at the island, a
number of natives including one woman, came aboard. They
danced a sort of minuet, hopping on one foot and indulging in a
highly expressive obscene dumb show. Balancing precariously on
one leg, they jerked the other to the rhythm of the song.

The sacred dances were quite different in character. They were
accompanied by chants celebrating the ancient heroes, the gods,
work in the fields, and warlike expeditions. The rhythm was
marked by a dancer who jumped up and down on a thin slab of
stone covering a trench containing a calabash that acted as a sound
box. This, together with sea shells, was the only musical instrument
the ancient Easter Islanders possessed. The dance itself consisted of
graceful, measured movements which the spectator to whom we
owe this description compares with the evolutions of the geishas.
There was no sudden gesture, no leaping, no extravagant pirouettes.

These dances were in the purest Polynesian tradition, a tradition
derived from South-East Asia. Neither this calm, nor this grace,
nor these undulating movements were, however, manifest in the
religious dances performed for us by Juan Tepano. Standing with
bent knees, he twirled a double-ended dance paddle, while rocking
from side to side like a bear. He told us that in the absence of a
ceremonial paddle the dancers brandished wooden statuettes or
moko (lizard figures). Some put them in their mouths, others stood
them on their heads, or made obscene gestures with them, placing
them between their legs or pressing them against their posteriors.
In the general excitement, some dancers even pretended to spit on
these sacred objects.

--- PAGE 204 ---
CHAPTER XII

The Mystery of the Tablets

‘No, these are nothing but the knotted cords, so waoney
called “ Origin-of-the-word”, that serve only to relate what
is already known and are powerless to impart fresh know-
ledge . .

(Segalen; Les Immémoriaux.)

Div rue ancicnt inhabitants of Easter Island have hieroglyphic
script which, if nage ec would disclose the mysterics of its past?
First to grasp the import of this question was et
Jaussen, Bishop of Tahiti. The newly-converted natives the
island had sent him, as proof of their devotion, a long cord plaited
from their hair and wound round an old picce of wood. The
Bishop's surprise when, upon casually examining the makeshift
reel, he perceived that it was covered with litte figures all of the
same height and carefully aligned, can be imagined. Without a
doubt, these were hieroglyphs!

The existence of signs engraved on wood that might be inter-
preted as hieroglyphs had not entirely escaped the attention of the
missionaries who settled on the island. Brother Eyraud mentions in
his first letter having seen tablets and staves covered with strange
signs in all the houses, but he adds that the natives attached no
particular im ce to them.

Two years later, while out walking, Father Zumbohm collected
4 worm-eaten fragment that a little boy had found on a rock. The
following day, a native who had learned with what interest the
Father had examined the characters, sold him a large tablet in a
perfect state of preservation. Such were the circumstances accom-
panying the discovery of objects that were to become Easter Island’s
most impenctrable mystery.

Twenty-one tablets, a staff, and three or four rei-miro (breast
plates) bearing a few rows of signs constitute the total body of
hieroglyphic” texts known today. The most complete collection,
consisting of five specimens, is preserved at Braine-le-Comte, Bel-

183

--- PAGE 205 ---
184 EASTER ISLAND

gium, in the Maison des Péres de Picpus. The British Museum pos-
sesses one tablet of whose antiquity, if not authenticity, T was
doubtful until I had an opportunity of examining it more closely,
when my scepticism was dispelled. Two fine tablets brought back
by W. J. Thomson in 1886 figure among the splendid Easter Island
collections on show at the National Museum, Washington. Finally,
we may mention the three examples that are the property of the
Bishop Museum in Honolulu. The other tablets belong to the
Museums of Berlin, Vienna, Leningrad, and Santiago, Chile.

With a few exceptions the same engraved symbols recur, with
numerous variations of detail, on the majority of these objects. They
consist of representations of human beings, birds, fish, crustaceans,
plants, ceremonial articles, and finally designs of purely geometrical
character. The anthropomorphic figures are among the most
numerous. All the signs, which are strongly stylized, must be the
product of a long artistic tradition. A strange and disturbing sym-
bolism is manifest in a number of figures combining the most dis-
parate elements: human bodies ending in geometric patterns or par-
tially animal in form, triangles and lozenges embellished with ears,
hands clinging to bars, and designs based on the vulva and other
parts of the human body. All the symbols, whatever the object they
represent, are the same height, so that a fish-hook or a breast-plate
may be the same size as a human figure. A whole fantastic world
seethes before our eyes as they run along these alternating rows of
signs. From a purely technical, and even artistic, point of view we
cannot but admire the quality of the incised work. In their masterly
simplification, the designs have a vigour and lightness that makes
one forget the heavy pressure the artist must have exerted on the
wood in order to cut their grooved outlines with a shark’s tooth or
an obsidian graver. Graphic art has rarely reached such a level of

ection in any primitive culture.

The tablets themselves are simply flat boards, scarcely ever
trimmed to a definite shape, because this would have reduced their
surface area. The signs are incised on both sides of the tablets in
regular longitudinal channels or flutes cut with a stone adze and
separated by low ridges. The symbols, all of the same height, are
spaced out regularly within these grooves, and each row runs in the
opposite direction to the one above and below it (the boustrophedon

--- PAGE 206 ---
THE MYSTERY OF THE TABLETS 185

system), so that the tablet has to be turned round at the end of each
line in order to have the signs in their correct sequence. The tablets
were ‘read’ from left to right, beginning with the lowest line. It is
possible that some chanters, like Metoro (of whom more later), did
not trouble to turn the tablet round at the end of the row but read
half the lines upside down, from right to left.

These tablets are extremely valuable by virtue of their rarity, their
artistic quality, and the mystery that surrounds them. Like every-
thing else on Easter Island, they have acquired an excessive market
price. The present-day natives have long sought to imitate them. A
comparison between these fakes and the originals reveals the full
mastery of the ancient engravers, for modern imitators have striven
in vain to reproduce the regularity and elegance of their antique
models. The imperfection of their handiwork has not, however,
ig them from doing profitable business with it. During the
last few years the forgers have considerably improved their tech-
nique, and if they had not hit on the tiresome idea of engraving
their signs on stones they might easily have duped the most wide-
awake and experienced observers.

On leaving France we were commissioned to try, by all the
means in our power, to obtain at least one tablet. We had no great
hope of success, but nevertheless we offered a reward of 1,000 pesos
to anyone who reported the existence of a genuine specimen; we
could not foretell the price we might have to pay for the object
itself. This promise caused a great stir amongst the native popula-
tion. Numerous individuals began to dream of caverns and tablets.
Every day some one came to tell us that the hiding-place of one or
more of these articles had been supernaturally revealed to him
during the night. The treasures generally lay in inaccessible grottoes
where no one, however great his cupidity, would risk going to look
for them. We did, however, attempt to explore one fee caves.
Tepano assured us that during his youth an old man confided in
him the whereabouts of a cavern in which precious objects had
been hidden. Since he seemed determined to undertake the search
despite our scepticism, we decided to join in. We took careful bear-
ings and sighted the cave below Tepeu ahu, half-way down the cliff.
The descent, down crumbling and slippery rocks, was not without
danger. The black reef bristling with sharp edges lowered threaten-

--- PAGE 207 ---
186 EASTER ISLAND

ingly right below us, as we tried to reach the grotto containing the
objects we coveted. The cavity was low and not very deep, and we
had to crawl on all fours. There were no tablets, but we did dis-
cover some fragments of bone and fish-hooks left there by fishermen
who had sheltered in the cave in days gone by. This setback did not
discourage Tepano. A grotto higher up the cliff immediately be-
came the exact spot he had been told about. The dangers of the
climb increased our scepticism, and we entrusted to Tepano’s son
the task of dissipating his father’s illusions. This was the only
opportunity we had of checking the allegedly precise information
concerning the whereabouts of treasure, which we received continu-
ously. The experience was too discouraging for us to risk our men’s
lives in other enterprises of the same nature.

In the absence of tablets, we collected a few traditions about those
who had engraved and used them. Most of their information was
given us by Charlie Teao. He was not an ‘ancient’ and possessed
no other authority than that of being the nephew of Te Haha, an
old man whom Mrs Routledge had known in 1914 and who had
studied in his youth at the school of the priestly caste.

Knowledge of the tablets, Teao told us, was the prerogative of a
class of chanters or reciters called tangata rongorongo. They be-
longed to noble families and many i them were related to the
king. They knew by heart the genealogies, the hymns and the oral
traditions of the island, which they taught their pupils in special
huts. They also instructed them in the engraving # the tablet signs,
first on the leaves and trunks of banana palms, then on boards.
Wood, being so rare, could only be entrusted to those who had
acquired adequate proficiency. The system of writing was not
explained until the students’ memories had been perfectly trained.
During their first years at school they had to learn by heart chants
that they recited while making string-figures, each of which corre-
sponded to a particular chant. These chants dealt with all the
circumstances of life, love and death. A great number of them were
ie that had the power to save people in danger and to multiply
plants and animals. Others were panegyrics addressed to chiefs on
solemn occasions.

The disciples of the tangata rongorongo were often their own
sons or specially gifted children of wealthy families. On arriving at

--- PAGE 208 ---
THE MYSTERY OF THE TABLETS 187

the school in the morning, they replied to their teacher’s greeting
with a joyous ko koe a. Then they squatted behind a flat stone that
served as a desk and sharpened their styles of frigate-bird’s bone.
An assistant counted the children to make sure none was playing
truant.

King Nga‘ara took an interest in these schools. He often came to
inspect them and enjoyed reciting poems himself, swaying from
one side to the other. He was strict about examinations, but when
children failed all the blame fell on their masters.

Every year there was a sort of open competition between the most
famous tangata rongorongo. These bardic gatherings were the
occasion for great inter-tribal feasts, the attraction of which was so
great that in time of war they induced a general truce. The King
organized the competition and contributed to the splendour of the
feast by generous issues of food. The Miru and the tribes related to
them helped the King to accumulate the necessary quantity of food-
stuffs. The bards and their pupils arrived, each carrying one or two
tablets. Those who were too young to take part in the competition
stood in front of the King in garlands of feathers. Each bard recited
in turn, and those who made mistakes were held up to ridicule by
the crowd. The gibes caused some injured vanity and led to quarrels
that the King was quick to pacify. The feast ended with a harangue
from the King, who exhorted the tangata rongorongo to greater
perfection and urged them to preserve the sacred hymns faithfully
so as to transmit them to future generations.

Te Haha’s recollections, handed on by his nephew, related to the
reign of King Nga‘ara, who, it seems, was a scholar and man of
letters. It must not be concluded from this that all the kings took
an equal interest in literature. When Nga‘ara died he was borne to
his last resting-place on a bier made of tablets, that were buried
with him.

Many details in Charlie’s account undoubtedly contain a core of
truth. Its general accuracy is guaranteed by Te Haha’s own story as
recorded by Mrs Routledge. But it is to be feared that some of his
recollections are interwoven with memories of the Mission school.

This intrusive Euro element must not lead us to reject these
traditions entirely. "he 'eallege of the tangata rongorongo, their
teaching, and their competitions recur among the Polynesians ot

--- PAGE 209 ---
188 EASTER ISLAND

Mangareva and the Marquesas. The tuhuna o'ono (Marquesan pos-
pec aes the r nor the mg sounds) were the tribe's bards
and professional chanters. Like their Easter Island colleagues, they
took part in mectings which the psalmodists of all the groups
attended in order to display the power of their memories. Those
whose memories proved to be failing lost the right to their title,
amidst the catcalls and sarcasms of their confréres. At Mangareva
the tangata rongorongo were members of 2 priestly caste “charged
with the religious chants and stories’, Father Laval, who refers to
them frequently, adds that they were recruited from the country’s
nobility. During religious ceremonies they formed a sort of chorus
which intoned the chants appropriate to the circumstances. One is
inevitably reminded of Easter Island on reading sentences like this
in Father Laval’s chronicle: ‘As they went along, the rongoron
intoned chants accompanied by drumming, and one of them led 5
way carrying a spear in front of him and reciting his sao‘enua.’
There are two striking details in this sentence: the spear carried by
the leader, which recalls the staff sometimes borne by the Easter
Island rongorongo, and the word sao, equivalent to the Easter ¢a‘u,
which will be discussed shortly.

The only original element the Easter Island bards can claim to
have introduced was their tablets covered with signs. If these sym-
bols were really the characters of a script, the Easter ee
would have crossed the frontier which, in many people's opinion,
divides the primitive world from the civilized. But did these tablets
in fact bear texts? In the letter already referred to, Brother Eyraud
speaks of tablets and stones covered with *hicroglyphic signs’. The
name given to these tablets, kohas rongorongo, suggests that the
stayes were the original form of these accessories employed by the
chanters. This word has been incorrectly translated as ‘intelligent
wood’, ‘talking wood"; in point of fact, kohaw docs not mean
‘wood', but ‘staff’, ‘stem’ or ‘stick’, The proper translation of this
term is, therefore, ‘reciting staff’ or ‘chanters staff’. This is un-
doubtedly the right name for the cylindrical rod preserved in the
Santiago Natur: Hisey. Museum, Chile, which measures four feet
in length by two feet four inches in diameter and is completely
covered with signs. If the tablets were originally kohaw or staves,
the resemblance between our Easter Island rongorongo and those of

--- PAGE 210 ---
THE MYSTERY OF THE TABLETS 189

Mangareva and the Marquesas would be even greater, for the latter
never recited their chants without their ceremonial staves, with
which they beat time, But here the parallel stops, for there is no
tradition of symbols haying been engraved on the sticks anywhere
outside Easter Island.

Te Haha and other old people asserted that there were different
kinds of tablets. One type, the kohau 0 te ranga, were war charms
that helped to defeat the enemy; but this name is possibly that of a
particular tablet containing prayers to the god Rorai-hoya.

The tablets were extremely sacred objects surrounded by tabus.
Teao was convinced that the signs could kill at a distance. The
magician had only to pronounce an incantation over a tablet to
cause onc or other of the animals depicted on it to come forth. The
Hate freed from the material entered the victim and henge

ut his death. Something of the fear inspired by the tablets has
survived. Some years ago a native named Riroko found a fragment
of a tablet: from that moment on he lost all his children, one after
the other, as well as other members of his family. He only escaped
from the maleficent spell emanating from the tablet by burning tt.

Certain tablets could become instruments of vengeance in the
hands of priests assisting families of which some members had been
mur: . Others ensured the fertility of the fields and were ex-
hibited during feasts.

This sanctity did not extend to an inferior of tablet called
tau. The nature of ta‘a is hard to discern from the scanty informa-
tion we possess. Like Mrs Routledge, I was told that these tablets
contained a list of exploits accomplished by an individual whose
memory was celebrated by his son in a solemn feast. But apart from
this, I was unable to obtain any definite facts on the subject, and it
is better to admit our ignorance than repeat idle chatter.

ss ie may contain rg re page chiefs. The objec-
tions d expressed against this view no longer a to me
entirely valid since in a recent fer tod Rian ea A.
Butinoy and Y. V. Knorozovy, ne pointed out that on a tablet,
now in Sie Chile, there is a row of signs which seems to
correspond to a short genealogy.

_ This is about all the Sefton: ewe able to obtain from our
informants. It does not go far towards helping us solve the problem,
G

--- PAGE 211 ---
190 EASTER ISLAND

The discovery of a system of writing in an island already famous
for its monuments might have been expected to arouse general
curiosity. Nothing could be more surprising than the indifference
of scholars in the face of this revelation. Not that they have been
short of hypotheses; but the trouble of interpreting these documents
with the help of the natives has been left to amateurs who had little
time or training for the task. The whole question would have been
completely clarified if investigators had tackled its patiently and
without preconceived ideas at a time when information was still
available. Despite the present difficulties, we can obtain valuable
pointers from the attitude of natives who were invited to ‘read’ the
tablets.

Efforts to extract an explanation of the tablets from the Easter
Islanders were considered fruitless by the few enquirers who made
them. None the less, one exceedingly important fact emerges from
these abortive endeavours: the mechanism of reading seems to have
been unknown to all the individuals who offered to decipher the
‘script’. Placed in front of a tablet, they intoned chants without
even trying to spell out the characters. The first attempt at decipher-
ing was undertaken by Father Zumbohm. He brought together
several learned islanders and questioned them on the meaning of
the signs. The moment they saw the tablet they began to intone a
hymn, which they continued until disagreement broke out and
some exclaimed : ‘No, it doesn’t go likeithat’. Differences of opinion
between the chanters were so great that the discouraged missionary
abandoned all hope of learning anything from them.
~ Monseigneur Jaussen proved more persevering. He had learned
‘that among the Easter Island émigrés working on the Brander
plantations in Tahiti was one, named Metoro, who had studied
under a famous master. One can feel in the Bishop’s story the
emotion that seized him when Metoro, holding the tablet in his
hands, turned it this way and that and then broke into a chant.
Metoro ‘read’ the tablet from left to right and then from right to
left, not troubling to turn it round so as to have the signs in their
normal position. Jaussen took down the text that was recited to
him, and the manuscript was recently published. If it is translated,
and each section of the sentence related to the corresponding sym-
bols, it may be seen that what Monseigneur Jaussen took for a

--- PAGE 212 ---
THE MYSTERY OF THE TABLETS Igt

hymn was merely an incoherent succession of brief descriptions of
the signs his informant had before his eyes. ‘This is a bird, an open
hand, a hunting-spear . . .” was what Metoro chanted and Mon-
seigneur Jaussen painstakingly took down. He had got out of the
difficulty by intoning a description of the symbols. Monseigneur
Jaussen’s attempt was conducted with patience and in a systematic
spirit. It might have been successful if he, like all those after him
who sought information from the natives, had not been handi-
capped by the preconceived idea that the tablets were the equivalent
of our books.

Quarrels, harsh words and unjust treatment resulted on other
occasions from this obstinate desire to have the tablets ‘read’ by
people for whom the connexion between these objects and the
island’s oral literature was undoubtedly of a quite different nature.
The case of Mr Croft affords a good example. This American had
found among the Easter Islanders working on the Papeete planta-
tions an individual who, he was told, was able to decipher the
tablets. He immediately invited him to come along next Sunday
and demonstrate his knowledge, placing in front of him a photo-
graph of one of these tablets. The native, after glancing at the
photograph, intoned a chant that Croft took down verbatim. Croft
subsequently lost his sheet of paper and asked the native to run
over the text again another Sunday. He obtained a new version
that seemed to him different from the first, though he could not be
sure; the same informant was summoned a third time for a fresh
reading. Meanwhile, Croft had found the missing page and, com-
paring it with the other two texts, found that none of them coin-
cided. Without hinting at this, he asked to hear the contents of the
tablet once again. His doubts were confirmed: the new text bore no
resemblance to the preceding ones. This was too much for Mr Croft’s
patience. He pointed out to the poor Easter Islander that identical
symbols could not change their meaning according to the Sunday.
He was so convinced of this that he sent his informant packing.

Thomson, the paymaster on an American man-of-war, was a
man of alert and curious mind, but he evinced the same lack of
discernment. During his visit to Easter Island in 1886, he met an
old man named Ure Vaeiko who had studied the tablet signs in his
youth and was acquainted with the oral traditions of his ancestors.

--- PAGE 213 ---
ag2 EASTER ISLAND

Thomson purchased two new tablets and was extremely anxious to
have them interpreted. Unfortunately, Ure Vaciko, who had
become a good Catholic, did not want to endanger his eternal salva-
tion by this momentary return to paganism. Fearing he might suc-
cumb to the tempting offers made to him, he decamped. Thomson
took advantage of a stormy night to run him to ground in the hut
where he had taken refuge. There he flattered his vanity and made
him recount ancient legends, while plying him with little glasses of
spirits. Fecling at the top of his form, Ure Vaciko lost his fears con-
cerning the next world and made no difficulty about ‘reading’, not
cen themselyes—that would have been a mortal so = the

hs of them belonging to the Bishop of Tahiti, Mon-
seigneur Soke: He eeroaneed Poa ease ath and reeled
off the contents from one end to the other without the slightest
hesitation. Those who were watching observed that he paid no heed
to the none of oa in cach line. Worse a oe not even
notice when otograph he was supposed to be ‘reading’ was
removed and pA ea by ae He os still going strong, recit-
ing hymns and legends, when he was brutally accused of fraud.
Sadly out of countenance, he launched into explanations that
Thomson docs not scem to have properly understood.

There is something pathetic about these misunderstandings aris-
ing from the encounter of two mentalities operating on different
planes. It would be ludicrous to believe, like these enquirers, that
the natives intended systematically to deceive them. They were not
ignorant people, as the few facts we know about them show. The
responsibility for these lost opportunities lics entircly with the
Europeans.

In 1914, when Mrs Routledge made a last attempt to consult oral
tradition, it was too late. Old Tomenika, who could have enlight-
ened her, died in the leper-colony a fortnight after a conversation
in the course of which he hdd murmured the last verses of a chant
and drawn a few symbols with a trembling hand. This inquiry
conducted in extremis nevertheless resulted in a gain for science.
Like all the other Easter Islanders who had been subjected to the
test of reading, old Tomenika was invited to give a demonstration
of his knowledge. He drew noughts and ticks on a piece of paper
and recited a chant. He was given some sheets of paper on which he

--- PAGE 214 ---
THE MYSTERY OF THE TABLETS 193

drew symbols, some of which were signs from the tablets. When he
was asked to read them, he repeated part of the same chant as the
previous day, the signs having taken the place of the ticks. Groups
of four or five words corr ded to symbol. From this Mrs
Routledge rightly concluded that ‘the signs were not to him, now
at any rate, connected with particular words’. Thus our last hope of
learning the real meaning of the tablets vanished for ever. The
glorious sunsct Mrs Routledge tells us she admired after leaving
Tomenika announced the deep night that was falling on the
island's past.

In 1932 the question of the existence of an Easter Island script
took an unexpected and sensational turn. No new key had been
found for the deciphering of the tablets, but it secmed as though
the mystery surrounding their origin had been finally dispelled
and that light had been cast on distant affinities of Asiatic
civilizations with the cultures of Polynesia. In a communication

ted to the Académie des Inscriptions ct Belles-Lettres, a
ungarian linguist, Guillaume de Hévesy, drew the attention of
the learned world to remarkable similarities between the signs on
the Easter Island tablets and those of a still undeciphered script
eee eencret in the Indus Valley at Harappa and Mohenjo-
daro. With a few exceptions, the concordance between a hundred
hieroglyphs or pi: taken from the Indus seals and a hun-
dred symbols from the Easter Island tablets appeared complete and
undeniable. Only the logical conclusions implied by this correlation
came up against scrious difficulties that had to be eliminated before
the relationship between the two scripts could be accepted as 2
scientific fact.
The following, in bricf, are the main objections that immediately
spring to mind when we consider the implications of de Hévesy’s
iscovery. The Indus civilization, contemporary with that of
Sumer, reached its height between the end of the fourth and the
middle of the third millennium 8.c. The civilization of Easter Island
began its decline at the middle of last century and has drawn out its
ony to the present day. Some 13,000 miles scparate the volcanoes

Easter Island from the muddy banks of the Indus. Between them
stretches the mass of the Indian sub-continent, the islands of Indo-
nesia, and vast expanses of ocean. Furthermore, the two civiliza-

--- PAGE 215 ---
194 EASTER ISLAND

tions have almost nothing in common: the people of the Indus lived
in great rationally planned cities with the carliest known sewerage
system. They knew how to weave, were acquainted with metal-
lurgy, and were first-rate potters. They possessed numerous domes-
tic animals, travelled in carts, and entertained commercial relations
with the towns of Mesopotamia. The citizens of Mohenjo-daro,
proud of their city, their buildings, their arts, and their many tech-
niques, would have treated as savages the Easter Islanders who, only
yesterday, were living in the Stone Age, carving statues of a mono-
tonous uniformity in the tufa of their volcanocs, dwelling in
wretched reed huts and—worst of all—indulging in cannibalism.
In spite of all these differences, the sophisticated poe of the
Indus and the ‘primitive’ natives of the Polynesian Ultima Thule
are supposed to haye shared that marvellous instrument which
appeared so late in the history of civilization—a system of writing.
A new mystery was therefore born from the sum of all these
contradictions. To diminish the distance in time and space separat-
ing the two scripts, de Hévesy put forward the hypothesis that the
Easter tablets were ae relics thousands of years old, which the
islanders’ ancestors t to the island, In support of this supposi-
tion he cites a vague tradition, collected by Thomson, to the effect
that Hotu-matu‘a, the discoverer of the island, brought with him
sixty-seven tablets. According to this view, the tablets that have
come down to us and are now owned by several museums might
have been part of this original collection. If this were so, the}
would have been just as mystifying to the Easter Islanders of last
century as they are to us, I shall take the unity later of givi
my oe as to the credibility of the ils of the tales fe
legends that constitute the island’s folklore. If we are to accept
element of the Hotu-matu‘a legend as an article of faith I
claim equal rights for the version that speaks of * paper books’
allegedly contained in Hotu-matu‘a’s luggage. From this it appears
that the ancient Easter Islanders did not have recourse to wooden
tablets to write the texts of their traditions until later, when they
had run out of paper. Let us recall here that Hotu-matu’a plays in
the island's legendary hi the réle of a culture hero, and that he
is credited not only with the introduction of cultivated plants—
which is doubtless perfectly truc—but also with the ion of

--- PAGE 216 ---
THE MYSTERY OF THE TABLETS 195

most of its institutions. It is therefore natural that storytellers should
accord him the honour of having brought the first tablets with him.
There is a wide gulf between this vague mythical tradition and the
possibility that the wooden tablets could have been preserved for
countless centuries, in the course of which their possessors ploughed
the seas and engaged in savage battles. How many tablets must
have been burnt in the huts that were set on fire during the wars
between tribes and lineages! In point of fact, all those extant were
engraved on Easter Island at a comparatively recent date. Proof of
this has been furnished by de Hévesy hi He had hoped that a
microscopic analysis of the tablets’ wood, by enabling the tree from
which it was taken to be identified, would furnish a valuable pointer
to the origin of these objects. ‘The results af this investigation were
disappointing. Among the tablets whose authenticity is beyond
uestion, three were cut in wood that is foreign to the island—
raxinus excelsior (ash) and Podocarpus latifolia. One large tablet
in the Braine-le-Comte collection, measuring thirty-seven by four
inches, is called the ‘Oar’ because it is actually engraved on a
European ashwood oar. It cannot, therefore, date from before 1722.
For other tablets the natives have used the indigenous toro-miro,
To dissociate the tablets and the signs that cover them from the
totality of Easter Island culture, to see in them anything but the
products of a local art, one must be blind to the lessons of style and
deaf to the testimony of the natives themselves. The Easter Islanders
have never ceased to assert—and the first statements were made by
those who were still acquainted with their ancient traditions—that
the tablets were engraved and used by bards, the rongorongo or
tangata rongorongo. The last of these lived in the nineteenth cen-
tury and the names of some of them are still known today. The
symbols themselves reflect the agricultural and geographical en-
vironment of the island, depicting animals and plants belonging to
the local fauna and flora. They portray the slightly stylized eanlind
of adzes, dance paddles, pectorals (rci-miro), wooden pendants
(tahonga), fish-hooks and other objects of which specimens have
been collected at a recent period and which may be admired in the
show-cases of numerous museums. At one point, Heévesy believed
he had identified among these signs representations of elephants
and monkeys. These samples of the Indian fauna arc, in fact, only

--- PAGE 217 ---
196 EASTER ISLAND

a badly drawn bird with a long beak and a bird-man. If any doubt
remains that the tablets were incised by Easter Island hands, it
should be dispelled by the fact that the British Museum possesses @
wooden rei-miro—one of the most typical ornaments in the Easter
culture—which bears a long ‘inscription’ in characters identical in
es ee of the ere ; dimorerod'by

Fi ast ar; nt tr iscov our
easicen and published by Lavac! i grr which, in
style and subject-matter, are related to the ‘hieroglyphs’ and testify
to the existence on the island of a graphic art that reached its highest
level on the tablets.

The relationship between the graphic system of the Indus and
that of Easter Island has been accepted as irrefutable by several
scholars, including Professors Langdon and Rivet. Others have
reserved judgment or been openly sceptical. The most meritorious
effort finally to solve the problem of the origin of the Easter script
is contai in a monograph, Die Osterinselschrift, published in
1938 by the Viennese scholar Robert yon Heine-Geldern, who has
brought to bear on this problem all the resources of an incompar-
able erudition and an ingenious mind.

Heine-Geldern considers any direct filiation between the two
scripts extremely doubtful, for the number of signs that are differ-
ent is much greater than the number of those that resemble one
another. The similarities between the two systems represent, in his
_ Opinion, survivals from an earlier stage of this script.

Heine-Geldern’s archacological researches had led him to place
the origin of Polynesian civilization in China. It was therefore very
natural that he should ask himself whether a knowledge of writing
might not have reached the Polynesians from this source. On com-
paring the Indus and Easter Island symbols with those of the
ancient Chinese civilization known to us from inscriptions on shells
and bones and going back to the second millennium 2.c., he found
that these three scripts did indeed share certain signs in common—
notably ten anthropomorphic Chinese signs, which he believed he
could also identify in the other two systems (see Fig. 4). These
resemblances, according to Heine-Geldern, also extend to ihe mean-
ing of the symbols in so far as they are known to us. Thus three
wavy parallel lines that meant ‘water’ in ancient China signified

--- PAGE 218 ---
THE MYSTERY OF THE TABLETS 197

‘rain’ or “wave’ on Easter Island, The Chinese cx the idea
of ‘circle’ or ‘encircle’ by a symbol shaped like 5 eight,
which suggested to the Easter Islanders ‘enclosure’ and “enclose”.
The Easter sign for ‘earth’ is very similar to, if not identical with,
a variant of the Chinese symbol for ‘mountain’. It is a pity that
Heine-Geldern confined himself to these three examples. A more
extensive list of parallels on these lines would have greatly strength-
ened his thesis, if the interpretations of the Easter signs, which rest
on the authority of Metoro, are correct.

Despite these correlations, Heine-Geldern does not claim a direct
filiation between the Chinese script and that of Easter Island, but
derives the latter from a Southern Chinese script related to that
used in China proper during the Shang-yin dynasty and no doubt
dating from the same period. Heine-Geldern goes on to suppose
that there existed in Central Asia or Iran a system of writing that
was the parent of those we know by the Indus Valley scals, the
Honan shells and bone fra ts, and the Easter Island tablets.

Heine-Geldern explains the diffusion of this script over such great
distances by the migration of a people who, about onc thousand
years before our era, sct out to settle the Pucific islands and intro-
duced into them skills and an art of which certain vestiges have
survived down to the present day. Among these he singles out the
Easter script, the peculiar artistic style of the Marquesas, certain
types of axe, and the system of reckoning time by decades that
seems to have existed on Easter Island, if we can believe the state-
ments of Mrs Routledge’s informant on this point. Heine-Geldern
is the first to admit that these survivals—important as they are in
his eyes—are not very numerous. If the ancient civilization borne
by the first emigrants from the Asian continent is not better pre-
served, this is because it was submerged by the invasion of the
Polynesians properly so-called, who must have occupied the Pacific
aan in about 1000 a.. The destruction of the ravaaiers and the

iestly caste, which alone possessed the secret script, would
explain the latter’s disappearance cv in Polynesia except
Easter Island, where it was saved by a fortunate chance. The catas-

that descended on the Easter Islanders last century give us”
an idea of the way in which an art or science that is the prerogative
of a restricted class or guild may disappear in a few years.
c®

--- PAGE 219 ---
198 EASTER ISLAND

Heine-Geldern has not confined his investigations to the con-
tinent of Asia. Boldly taking up a suggestion made by Professor
Hornbostel, he demonstrated parallels between the Easter Island
signs and those of a pictography still in use among the Cuna Indians

the Panama Isthmus. Its existence has been revealed to the
learned world by Erland Nordenskidld, who has published fine
specimens of the picture-writing employed by medicine-men to
memorize incantations. Each medicine-man has his own picto-
graphy, but there is none the less sufficient resemblance between
the designs they draw to allow us to speak of a system and a stylistic
tradition. Hornbostel was struck, above all, by the likeness between
many of these pictograms and the idcograms of the ancient Chinese
script. Heine-Geldern’s attention was caught primarily by the
affinities of the Cuna drawings with the Easter signs. It cannot be
denied that the presence in Panama of a three-thousand-year-old
system of picture-writing, whose place of origin is across the ocean
in China, would set a problem the solution of which would not be
casy even for the most audacious diffusionist. Heine-Geldern ad-
vances the hypothesis that the relationship between these three
scripts is due cither to an influence exercised by East Polynesian
culture on Central America, or to the three scripts having a common
origin, which could only lie in China.

Among the many attempts to trace the origin of the Easter
Island “glyphs” an important place must be reserved for a study by
Professor e H. R. von Koenigswald, whose sensational discoveries
of fossil men have rendered him justly famous.

Convinced that Indonesia has too often been neglected in Poly-
nesian research, he published a series of patterns embroidered on

cloth from Sumatra that showed the closest analogy with
the Easter signs. Basing his hypothesis on this and other
the learned prehistorian su the ibility of a migration

An Argentinian, Professor José Imbelloni, has recently published
a study of the Easter Island tablets that contributes few original
clements to the solution of the problem, with the exception of a new
parallel he draws between a dozen Easter Island symbols and char-
acters belonging to a Brahmi script (third century 5.c.) that occurs

--- PAGE 220 ---
THE MYSTERY OF THE TABLETS 199

on inscriptions found in the caves of Ceylon. He also points out
the resemblance between the symbols on the tablets and certain
signs in the script of the Lolo of Szechuen, and draws attention to
the characters of the syllabary used on Wolcai—an island in the
Caroline Archipelago—whose origins are obscure and which may
very well be mercly a script invented on the spot under the influence
of Malay, Indian, or even European writing. On the basis of these
rather vague comparisons Imbelloni claims to be able to demons
trate the phases of an ‘Indo-Pacific graphic system’.

One of the most striking differences between the Indus Valley
and Chinese signs on the onc hand, and those of Easter Island on
the other, lies in the way they are drawn. While the former arc
linear and schematic, the latter are formed by a double line bound-
ing a silhouctte. In other words, the Easter symbols are more real-
istic than those of the other scripts, From this it has been deduced
that they represent an earlier system of writing than that disclosed
by the Indus seals. Imbclloni does not take this view. He gets round
the difficulty by the hypothesis of a ‘rejuvenation of the Easter
Island script, which was originally linear but which, after penctrat-
ing the Oceanic world, seh Gant a plastic interpretation domin-
ated by the bird myth’. In other words, this stylistic transformation
was due to the bird cult in Oceania. Such methods of interpretation
are, to say the least, puzzling.

These, in broad outline, are the explanations put forward by the
adherents of diffusionism. A book addressed to the general reader
is no place for long scientific discussions, and I must therefore con-
fine myself to general objections rather than an cxamination of
details. Moreover, 1 could not follow Heine-Geldern into the
domain of Asian archaeology, which is not my field of work, and I
leave it to others to say whether his hy, concerning the
origin of the Indus Valley and Chinese scripts is in line with
ae knowledge. ae

‘© begin with a general comment: subjective element in
these comparisons must not be overlooked. The correlations that
struck Hetne-Geldern would certainly not have caught my atten-
Gon, but I repeat that we are dealing»here with a personal factor
that eludes the scientific yardstick. Furthermore, the problem set by
the identity that seems to exist between the symbols of these differ-

--- PAGE 221 ---
200 EASTER ISLAND

¢nt systems of writing does not appear to me insuperable. It has
been claimed that the important thing is the fact of the similarity,
not its explanation. Alas, I am not so sure. If we suppose, with
Heine Geldern, that these three scripts are derived froma common
source, after which each one evolved in a distinct direction, it is
difficult to understand why certain composite or simple signs
remained unchanged for five to six thousand years while so many
others were modified or lost, Even admitting the force of habit,
such a stability in an ideographic or even pictographic script would
be a strange phenomenon demanding an explanation. It is not for
us to provide it.

My disagreement with Hévesy and Heine-Geldern is based,
above all, on a question of method and also on a different concep-
tion of the nature and development of cultures. Thus I should have
wished, before undertaking a comparison between the Easter Island
signs and those of other scripts, to classify all the symbols occurring
on the tablets. Anyone who examines the available documents on
the Easter Island script attentively will see that the same signs are
by no means always drawn in the same way and that they are far
from showing the uniformity of our printed characters, It is hard to
belicve that any particular change of meaning was expressed by the
presence of an arm or leg, the position of the head, or the shape of
a hand, If the same variations occurred with some frequency, of
course, we could consider them separate pictograms or id
but can we say that this is the case? Different signs are frequently
joined together, perhaps without any alteration in the mcaning of
the individual symbols so combined. Comparisons between an
pomorphic symbols are not without danger. There is always the
risk that more or less stylized representations of the human figure
may create the illusion of a similarity between pictographic systems
that have nothing to do with one another. Correlations of this sort
are foolhardy even when the figure is depicted holding something
in its hand, especially if we do not know what this object is. The
fact that there are men holding sticks, weapons, or other instru-
ments on both the Indus Valley seals and the Easter Island tablets
does not seem to me a very decisive piece of evidence on which to
assert a link, even if indirect, between two cultures that are utterly
different from so many points of view.

--- PAGE 222 ---
THE MYSTERY OF THE TABLETS 201

My doubts are based on the resemblances I have noted between »
the Easter signs and the geometric motifs and anthropomorphic or
zoomorphic that abound in numerous ancient and modern
pictographies, It is not only the Cuna Indians who draw symbols
resembling those of Easter Island, but also the Quechua and
Aymara Indians of the Andes, who have adopted a picture-writing
that helps them memorize Catholic prayers. Is one to conform to
the comparative method described above and trace a link between
Easter Island and the Andean Indians, simply because it occurred
to them in the last century, to invent images to correspond to the
words of the Catholic prayers? What are we to say of the ideo-
graphic or syllabic es devised by several tribes—Eskimocs,
Bamum Negroes, Vai, for cxample—which also employ symbols
whose equivalents are to be found on the tablets? We the that
these scripts were created by men who, unable to read and write
themselves, knew that other peoples transmitted words by means of
signs.

The scientist’s whole attitude towards the affinity of cultures
separated by space and time depends in the last analysis on his
conception of culture and man’s inventive faculty. Since I myself
belong to that group of anthropologists which is devoted to the
study of the reciprocal influences cultures exercise upon one another,
I think I am in a position to grasp the significance of the investiga-
tions carried out by the ‘historical school’ and I know the part it
has played in twentieth oem. anthropology; but I believe it has
sometimes exceeded the bounds of prudence and forgotten that a
culture is not epee exclusively of features that combine and
disperse pretty well at random. Every clement a culture borrows is
integrated into a structure that ifies it and is modified by it.
Institutions that are pure survivals without functional value are an
¢xecption. Primitive man, like modern man, though he also
d on external stimuli to transform his culture, is not incap-

of innovating. Cultures sometimes change rapidly and develop
@ great creative force in domains that suddenly assume particular
importance in the eyes of a group. We know the part played by
sacred chants, magical incantations and genealogies in most, if not
all, Polynesian socicties. Voyagers and missionaries have
the value the priests attached to exactitude in recitation, lest the

--- PAGE 223 ---
202 EASTER ISLAND

Fig. 4. Similar symbols in the Indus script: (a) on the Easter Island
tablets; (b) in the most ancient forms of Chinese writing according
to Heine-Geldern. Die Osterinselschrifi, Anthropos, Vol. 33,

page 873.

slightest mistake might destroy all the efficacy of a long ceremony.
In many islands the priests or the chanters, who were the deposit-
aries of this oral literature, have utilized mnemotechnical methods
that we shall enumerate farther on. Was it beyond the creative
genius of the Easter Islanders to invent a pictography that does not
seem to have differed essentially from systems devised by other
groups at approximately the same cultural level as the Polynesians?
To my way of thinking, it is impossible to consider the problem
of the origin of the tablets as solved. It seems to me that other
proofs, obtained by a more rigorously scientific method, are neces-
sary before a verdict can be pronounced in favour of Hévesy’s and
Heine-Geldern’s conclusions, attractive though they are.

--- PAGE 224 ---
THE MYSTERY OF THE TABLETS 203

Must we then, after so many setbacks, abandon all hope of getting
to know more about the tablets? Not at all, though it must be
admitted that the data on which we can draw for a solution of the
problem are scanty.

Polynesian dialects make extensive use of the duplication of
words to add intensity to the expression of an idea or to indicate
plurality. The famous chants recited by the rongorongo are gener-
ally interminable poems abounding in repetitions and enumera-
tions. In addition, every sentence in the Polynesian dialects contains
a large number of particles indicating movement, position and other
relationships. If ie signs correspond to a gin or alphabetic
system we ought to find the same sequences of

2 eibeh UAB GSHY (SMH UR
evi SOT.

Fig. 5. Sequences of identical signs in row 1 of tablet
Aruku-kurenga.

symbols continually

recurring wherever the same words or sounds were repeated in the
text. The decipherer’s first task is therefore to extract these groups
of identical signs. An analysis of two tablets which I undertook was
not SSoens though I was able to find a few rows of identical
s.

Deas agree with Heine-Geldern on one important point. The
signs on the tablets are too uniform and too conventionalized to be
entirely comparable with the designs that occur in the pictogra s
of other peoples. The Ojibway or Cuna Indians, who draw Ss
to evoke a sentence or passage in an incantation, enjoy greater free-
dom of expression than the Easter Island scribe.

When we are endeayouring to decipher an unknown script, the
first thing to do is to classify and count the signs. This I have tried
to do with the tablet known as Aruku-kurenga. Out of a total of
960 symbols the image of the sooty tern—symbolizing the god
Makemake—is repeated 183 times. Nearly a fifth of the tablet is,

--- PAGE 225 ---
204 EASTER ISLAND

therefore, covered by a single sign. An individual with a lozenge
for a head is uced nincty-four times. Depictions of human
beings and birds represent about one-third of the symbols. This
proportion does not seem to favour the hypothesis of a syllabic or
alphabetic script.

Despite the conventional character of the signs, the Easter Island
script none the less bears an affinity to primitive pictographies by
virtuc of the number of realistic representations, such as human
figures, birds, turtles, crabs, artifacts and so on. The symbols we
designate geometric may possibly depict objects we can no lous
identify. There is no reason, a priori, why cach character in this
system of writing should not be associated with a line of or
even a whole verse. To read the tablet the bard would have to know
the text of the chant by heart, and the sole purpose of the signs
would be to save him fon lapses of memory that would be con-
sidered very bad omens, In this case, the Easter Island tablets may
be scocaniel B a mnemotechnic instrument for the use of the rongo-
rongo, the Polynesian bards. Analogies with other civilizations sup-
port this interpretation. The Ojibway Indians, for example, draw
figures and symbols on strips of bark, the sight of which arouse
associations with the sentences or verses of the spells they are recit-
ing. Picture writing is not always simply an aid to memory, how-
¢yer: it also possesses an intrinsic magic power calculated to enhance
the efficacy of the words.

There is one fact which has not sufficiently struck those who
have studied the tablets and of which great account should be taken
in interpreting them. Whatever the shape and size of these picces
of wood, they are invariably covered with signs on both sides, with-
out the slightest space being wasted. The tablets are of various and
largely fortuitous shapes. If the sum total of the signs corresponded
toa text of predetermined length, they would not invariably extend
over both sides, not a ai the bevelled edges. Are we to credit
the scribe with a miraculous instinct that led him always to choose
a piece of wood whose dimensions exactly coincide with the length
of his text? When the symbols are incised in a cylindrical staff,
they run all round the circumference without anything to show
where the inscription begins or ends. It is as if the scribe had been
determined to engrave as many signs on the wood as possible. Such

--- PAGE 226 ---
THE MYSTERY OF THE TABLETS 205

an aim is hard to reconcile with the hypothesis that these signs are
the characters of a script.
The number of symbols on the large tablets far exceeds the len
of ordinary Polynesian chants, if we acccpt the idea that each “en
corresponds to a verse or a bar. It may be objected that each tablet
contains several chants; but, in that case, why are they not separ-
ated by a space or a conventional sign? Why does the text appear so
continuous that ¢ven faults in the wood have been covered with
signs? This creates an added difficulty for the script hypothesis. All
the same, unless we deny the authority and unanimity of traditions,
the tablets were associated with literary pieces. What was the nature
of this link between the chants and the tablets?
The Maori orators and reciters added emphasis to their wards by
the manipulation of a finely engraved club held in the hands. The
calogists made use of a seaft marked with notches representing
© afcestors. This aid to memory was really a useless accessory,
because the reciter knew his list of ancestors off by heart; but the
staff enabled him to give the audience a concrete image of the
tions of ancestors, The priests of Tahiti and the Tuamotus
symbolized the liturgical poems by a staff or an object of plaited
straw, which they deposited on the altar after finishing the chant it
represented. These few examples reveal a tendency to create con-
crete representations of sacred poems and other literary pieces. The
Marquesan bards (ono‘ono) used to associate their liturgical poems
with objects which, although very different to look at, were of the
same order as the rest: these were little bags of plaited coconut fibre
from which hung knotted cords, The exact significance of the bags
is not clear, but the knots are said to have fulfilled the same func-
tion as the notches on the Maori staves and to have been aids to the
memories of the reciters of genealogies. The recitation of a list of
ancestors was generally preceded by a lengthy enumeration of ab-
stract notions, gods and natural elements which, by uniting, pro-
duced the world and ultimately the first sera This part of the
gencalogy—the rumu, or root—was symbolically rej ted
the fibre ‘bundle’ or bag. There would have edn nae
ous about these bundles if they had been solely aids to memory; but
they were material representations of the chants relating to the
genealogies, Of what use can these strange balls of string have been

--- PAGE 227 ---
206 EASTER ISLAND

to the bard? Some informants gave us to understand that each verse
of the poems corresponded to a knot, but this is far from having
been the case with all bundles. One of them was described as a
‘receptacle’ containing the chants. The bard held it in his hand and
asked his auditors which hymn they wished to hear. He then in-
toned the chant requested, without letting go of the bundle. These
objects so fully represented the concrete form of the chants that they
were solemnly presented to the young men after their initiation into
tribal folklore. Thus the Marquesas, whose culture offers so many
analogies with that of Easter Island, furnishes a complex of facts
and ideas that perhaps provides the key to the riddle of the tablets.

I therefore advance the following provisional interpretation of the
mystery of the tablets: The rongorongo or Easter Island bards used
staves (kohau) to augment the effects of their recitations. On these
staves they engraved sacred symbols. These symbols, like the
notches on the staves of the Maori orators, may originally have been
aids to memory; later the decorative or mystic aspect of the symbols
gained over their pictographic significance. The tendency arose to
multiply them haphazard on the staves or tablets carried by the
bards. We may suppose that the signs were arbitrarily associated
with the chants, each symbol representing a significant word, a
phrase, a sentence, or even a verse. The custom of chanting a poem
while looking at a figure has not entirely disappeared from Easter
Island. After producing a cat’s-cradle, the loess recites a poem that
is often interpolated in a story. The solution to the problem is
possibly suggested by the remark of one informant: “Our ancestors
recited poems for tablets covered with images; we, in our ignorance,
recite them for the string-figures.’

I have given my.own interpretation of the significance of the

. tablets. It will certainly have to be revised when Dr Th. S. Barthel

publishes his book Grundlagen zur Entzifferung der Osterinsel-
schrift. In a letter which I received just before sending this book to
the press, Dr Barthel informed me that he had arrived at conclu-
sions which differ in many respects from mine. One must await the
publication of his book before passing any judgement on these, but
Dr Barthel’s hypotheses concerning the nature of the Easter Island
ae are certainly of great interest and may be the key to the
riddle.

--- PAGE 228 ---
THE MYSTERY OF THE TABLETS 207

I am most grateful to Dr Barthel for permission to summarize
the result of his painstaking investigations. Dr Barthel thinks that
Easter Island writing can be defined as a conventional system of
recording communicable traditions. It uses a limited fund of
graphic elements which can be increased remarkably by means of
further combinations following strict rules. The Easter Island script
is more evolved than mere pictography and contains ideograms
with fixed and variable meanings, different levels of symbolization
and word-signs which can be used for noting names, in rebus-
fashion for homonyms. This system cannot render a spoken
sentence completely with all its grammatical particles, but it may be
defined as ‘embryo writing’. The scribe had to choose the main
ideas before expressing them in a sort of telegraphic style. Thus: the
tablets consisted of different groups of ‘catch-words’ which con-
veyed a clear and definite meaning. Such ‘condensed texts’ accom-
plished a mnemonic function, but the system itself cannot be
equated with other mnemonic devices. The principles of text-con-
densation and partial phonetic indications made understanding
difficult, but not impossible.

There are often strange coincidences in discoveries. In recent
years Russian scientists (B. Kudriatsev, A. Olderogge, N. A.
Butinoy and Y. V. Knorozoy) have also endeavoured to unravel the
secret of the tablets. They have now arrived at important conclu-
sions which were betige to my attention a few weeks after I
became acquainted with Dr Barthel’s research. The Russian scholars
have discovered that several rows of signs in different tablets were
identical, and they have listed many recurrent combinations of two.
or more signs which seem to correspond to words or sentences.
Professor Olderogge believes that the Easter Island script had
already reached a stage of development comparable to early Egyp-
tian hieroglyphics. Some signs scem to be ideograms, accompanied
by a key sign, while others appear to have a phonetic value which
is also determined by a key sign.

--- PAGE 229 ---
CHAPTER XIII

Easter Island Myths and Legends

Durine our stay at Anakena, Tepano dictated to us the legendary
history of his people. He felt inspired by the royal mausoleums and
he enjoyed having only to stretch out his arm to show us the spot
where the events in his story actually happened. His memory was
not always reliable. He hesitated over some proper names and for-
got a few details; but he had a surprisingly clear recollection of the
main facts. He apologized for his lapses and in the evening, when
our sessions of inquiry were over, he used to walk away thoughtful
and downcast at having left us only an imperfect picture of his
ancestors’ exploits. Tepano loved these legendary tales; he believed
in them and nothing seemed to him too miraculous or exaggerated.
Forestalling our scepticism, he exclaimed frequently: ‘The people
of the old days knew more than we and they had much more
mana.’

I hope this English translation may have retained something of
the simple pungency of the original text, yim of its tedious
repetitions. The reader must visualize great fields of stones, a fire-
blackened shore, green hills in the distance, and the sea, that old
friend of the Polynesians, whose winds and waves carried the first
men to the strand on which we were listening to their story. Here
it is:

The land of our fathers was a great island to the west called Marae-
renga. The climate was warm and many trees grew there, of which
our ancestors made large boats or gathered together to build them-
selves houses. In spite of the shade, people were sometimes killed
by the heat.

Hotu-matu‘a was a chief of this island, but he was forced to leave
it after a quarrel with his brother Te Ira-ka-tea. We do not know
the cause of this dispute, which provoked a war between the two
chiefs. Another story is also told. Hotu-matu‘a’s brother was in love
with a woman whom the ariki Oroi wished to marry. The young
woman, hesitating between the two, promised Oroi she would be

208

--- PAGE 230 ---
EASTER ISLAND MYTHS AND LEGENDS 209

his if he walked round the island without stopping to rest or sleep.
Oroi submitted to this test, but meanwhile the girl ran away with
Hotu-matu‘a’s brother. There was war between the tribe of Oroi
and the tribe of Hotu-matu‘a. Oroi being the stronger, Hotu-matu‘a
was obliged to set out in search of new lands in order to escape
death or dishonour.

There was in the island a certain Hau-maka, who had tattooed
King Hotu-matu‘a. Hau-maka had a dream: his soul pe
across the sea to an island where there were holes [ craters] and fine
beaches. Six men had landed there at the same time.

Hotu-matu‘a understood that Hau-maka’s dream was a promise.
He chose six men, gave them a canoe, and told them to sail straight
ahead until they reached the land Hau-maka’s soul had seen. As
they moved away from the shore the King called after them: ‘Go
and look for a fine beach where the King can settle.’

The crossing was quick and fair. The six men came in sight of
Easter Island and when they saw the crater of the Rano-raraku they
cried out: ‘There is Hau-maka’s hole.’ This was the first name of
the volcano. They sailed round the island looking for the beach the
King had told them to find.

Our beaches are small and littered with rocks; nevertheless, every
time they caught sight of a beach, one of the six men called out:
“Let us stop here. There is the beach for King Hotu-matu‘a’; but
the pilot said: ‘No, this beach is not worthy of a king.’ They
doubled Poike headland and came to Anakena, where we are
now. When they saw this fine stretch of sand in front of them,
and this calm green water, they all stood up and said: ‘Here is
the beach of which Hau-maka dreamed and where our King will
live.’ They turned the prow of their canoe towards it and dis-
embarked.

A large turtle lay asleep on the beach. They wanted to turn it
over on its back, but it seriously injured one of the young men with
one of its feet. His companions picked him up and carried him into
the Ihu-arero cave. They remained there three days caring for him.
Then they remembered Hotu-matu‘a’s order and wished to go to
the west coast of the island to meet him. They did not know what
to do with the injured man, but were ashamed to leave him all by
himself. They piled up five heaps of stones in front of the cave and

--- PAGE 231 ---
210 EASTER ISLAND

ordered them to speak on their behalf every time their companion
called them. Then they left.

No sooner had they reached Mataveri than they saw Hotu-
matu‘a's double canoe approaching the shore. The King shouted to
them: “What is this country like?’ ‘It is a bad country,’ replied the
young men, ‘the taros are smothered by weeds, and it’s no good
pulling them up, they grow again.’ Thea Hotu-matu’a uttered a
curse: ‘Bad country, you shall be good at low tide, but the high
tide shall kill all of you.’ We do not know what Hotu-matu'a
meant by these words, Some think that this malediction was ad-
dressed to Marae-renga, which vanished beneath the sca. In any
casc, the young man, frightened by these words, cried out: “Why
did you say these things, Hotu-Matu'a, are you not afraid that your
words may bring us bad luck?’

Then Hotu-matu'a cut the ropes joining the two boats. He told
Tu'v-ko-ihu to sail along the northern coast and he himself set off
towards the south. The two boats reached Anakena at the same
time. Seing that Tu'u-ko-ihu’s boat was gaining on him, Hotu-
matu‘a stood up in the of his canoe and cried: “Paddles, do
not thrust.’ Such was the power of his mana that Tu‘u-ko-ihu’s
boat halted and Hotu-matu‘a was the first to land on the sands of
Anakena. At that moment he heard a moan: his wife had been
scized with the pains of childbirth. He immediately called Chief
Tu‘u-ko-ihu, who came and received a male child whose navel cord
he cut according to the rites and for whom he recited a charm: the
charm glorifying the power of young chiefs when they come into
the world to carry on the lincage of the gods. While Tu'u koihu
was receiving the joune prince, his own wife brought into the
world a daughter, Princess Avarci

The same day, all the people who had come in the canoes dis-
embarked. They unloaded the plants and animals they had with
them. These plants were taros, yams, sugar-canes, bananas, # and
then all the trees that have disa ed—such as hibiscus and toro-
miro. As for the animals, onl chickens and rats had survived.
Hotu-matu‘a had set out with several other species, but these did
not come to the island until the white men brought them later.

Oroi—the same who had made war on Hotu-matu‘a—was among
those who landed. He left the boat at night, for he had voyaged

--- PAGE 232 ---
EASTER ISLAND MYTHS AND LEGENDS 211

secretly to take his revenge. For a long time Oroi wandered about
the island until the day when he saw Hotu-matu‘a’s sons resting in
the sun lying on their bellies. As they had swum a great deal for
their pleasure, they were sleeping. Oroi went up to them and killed
them by sticking a crayfish’s tail into their behinds.

In the evening, Hotu-matu‘a, seeing that his sons did not return,
went to look for them. He found their bodies on the beach. He
examined them closely and said: ‘O Oroi, you have crossed the seas
to continue your war, for I recognize your hand!’ And the King
wept bitterly over his children.

A year passed. Hotu-matu‘a had travelled over the whole island,
inspecting the new villages, taking part in the feasts, and teaching
the people the sacred chants of their ancestors. Oroi followed him
everywhere, seeking an opportunity of killing him. He had plaited
a rope and stretched it across the King’s path, but the King saw it
and stepped over it. Oroi pulled the rope, but he could not make
the King fall. Hotu-matu‘a said to himself: ‘O Oroi, the day will
come when you will die by my hand!’

When Hotu-matu‘a was passing Hanga-te-tenga, Oroi stretched
his rope across the path as usual. The King pretended to be caught
and fell in the grass. Oroi leapt upon him to kill him, but as he
leant forward Hotu-matu‘a sprang up and split his skull with his
club. This was how Oroi perished, who had been a chief on Marae-
renga. His body was placed in an oven, but his flesh, being a chief's,
could not be cooked. It was taken to an ahy that still bears his
name.

When he was old, Hotu-matu‘a divided the island among his
children. Each of them became the ancestor of a tribe. After carry-
ing out this partition, Hotu-matu‘a went to the Rano-kao volcano.
He ascended to the summit of the crater and sat down on the rocks
facing the west, looking towards his fatherland, Marae-renga. He
called upon four gods that lived in the land of his birth: ‘Kuihi,
Kuaha, Tongau, Opapaku,’ he said, ‘the time has come to make
the cock crow.’ The cock of Marae-renga crowed and his crowing
was heard across the sea. The hour of his death had come. Hotu-
matu‘a turned to his sons and said: ‘Take me back.’ They carried
him into his hut, where he passed away. His body was buried in an
ahu at Akahanga.

--- PAGE 233 ---
212 EASTER ISLAND

THE WAR OF THE LONG-EARS AND THE LITTLE-EARS

Many years passed. The island was ruled by people with long,
pendulous cars. They were intelligent; and it was they who built
all the ahs on the coast. The work was done by the people with
little ears, whom they had reduced to slavery.

One day, the Big-Ears said to the Little-Ears: ‘Go and throw into
the sea all these stones that clutter up the ground.’ The Little-Ears
replied: “We shall do nothing of the sort, for we need these stones
for our food. We need them to cook with and also to make the
potatoes, the sugar-canes and the taros *‘suffer’’. For when these

fants suffer, they grow and become stronger and larger.’ The Big-
Ears were angry at this disobedience and plotted a destruction
of the aararest a

At the foot o Poike promontory they dug a pit extendin
from the north coast to the south coast, They filled it tik rae
and grass, for it was their intention to roast the Little-Ears in it.
Now, it happened that a Littl-Ear woman lived at Potu-te-rangi,
where she was married to a Long-Ear man. Her relatives and
friends of the Little-Ear tribe did not know why such a large pit
had been dug and they wondered what the Most nd grass heaped
up in it were for. The Little-Ear woman pestered her husband with
her questions until he told her the pit was an oven to cook the
Little Ears in. The same night, this woman passed on the news to
her relatives: “Watch my house,’ she said, ‘and when the Big-Ears
are lighting their oven come up behind them and push them into
the fire, And instead of a feast of Litth-Ears there will be a feast
of Big-Ears." ’

The woman went back into her house and said: ‘Now act
quickly.’ She stood in front of the door of her hut with a basket she

etended to be weaving, but really it was to warn her tribe of the

nger. When she saw the Big-Ears ing to attack, she gave
a signal, and the Little-Ears advanced on the house and fell upon
the Big-Ears, who had just lit the wood and leaves at the bottom
of the great pit. Surprised by this sudden attack, they offered no
resistance, but fled straight in front of them. Where could they go?

They fell into the fire, where all of them—men, women and
chil i with the exception of two warriors, who suc-

--- PAGE 234 ---
EASTER ISLAND MYTHS AND LEGENDS 213

ceeded in crossing the obstacle by walking over the corpses. They
ran towards Anakena and took refuge in the cavern of Ana-vai.
The Little-Ears followed them and poked them with pointed
sticks to make them come out. The two men ran from one end of
the cave to the other, making a strange noise, the sound of which
has always made us laugh: ‘Ororoin’. Finally, a matato‘a ap-
proached the troop of Little-Ears who were tormenting the two
men, and said: ‘Warriors, let us spare these men, Why should we
kill them? Let them go free,’ The Little-Ears returned to the pit in
which the Long-Ears were just burning up. They filled it in and
went home—henceforth sole masters of the island.

The two Long Ears were adopted by the Little-Ears and I know
their sons: one lives at Hanga-roa and the other is in the leper
settlement.

THE GREAT WAR OF THE TU'U CONFEDERATION AGAINST THE
CONFEDERATION OF HOTU-ITI
The people of Hotiti never liked those of the west. There were
many wars between them in which sometimes one and sometimes
the other group cmerged victorious,

I shall tell you about the cruellest of these wars. I cannot tell you
when it took place. I do not know whether it was a long time after
Hotu-matu'a or only a few years before Captain Cook. Many people
perished and if you walk about the island you can see their bones
scattered among the stones.

The war started like this: Two young men, Makita and Roke-
haua, had come to Hotu-iti to pay a visit to Kainga, The latter was
a great warrior who had a fine hut and was generous to his visitors.

i¢ said to them: ‘Young men, come into my hut.’ When they had
crossed the threshold he rubbed noses with them as a token of
friendship. Kainga roasted a fowl for them and sent an ado)
child to bring them the giblets he had grilled on the stones of the
oven, When the little boy entered and offered him this choice dish,
Rokehaua asked: ‘What's that you are bringing me?’ ‘These are
chicken’s nie replied the child. Rokchaua thrust them aside,
saying: ‘Chicken’s giblets . . . Know that I do not want any, for I
am used to feeding on human entrails.’

The child repeated these words to Kainga. ‘They want human

--- PAGE 235 ---
“214 1 EASTER ISLAND

entrails, do they?’ said Kainga. ‘All right, they shall have them.”
He called the child and ordered him to lie down on the ground.
The little orphan understood what awaited him. He wept and sung
a song: Alas, alas, farewell country where I have lived. . . . Kainga
slit his throat, opened his belly, and took out the entrails, which ie
grilled on the stones of the oven. He took them to his guests him-
self. When Rokehaua saw the dish that was being offered to him,
he woke Makita and said to him: ‘Look, here are human entrails.
Makita, who had not heard his friend’s imprudent words, realized
that they would not have long to wait for Kainga’s revenge. He
fled from the house through a hole in the wall, and Rokehaua
followed him. They fled because they had caused the death of
Kainga’s adopted son by their words. From afar Kainga shouted
after them: ‘You have rejected the food your host Kainga offered to
you. There will soon be a boat whose keel will be at Pepe and
whose caulking will be on Rano-aroi.’

Kainga called together his people and told them to collect timber
to build a great boat. He sent gangs of workmen to Rano-aroi to
fetch moss to caulk the planks.

SECOND EPISODE OF THE WAR

Long ago—but how long ago I cannot say—the Tupa-hotu and the
Miru were at war. It was a long war. This is how it began. Kainga,
the Tupa-hotu chief of the western tribes, quarrelled with Toari, a
warrior of the eastern tribes. In all the battles in which he had met
him he had not been able to kill him.

Kainga had a son, Uri-avai, who was still a child. This son had a
dream: his soul had left his body and, after wandering in the plain,
found itself facing a cock. The soul took a stone and threw it at the
cock, which fell dead. When Kainga heard the story of the dream
he was overcome with joy: the dream foretold the death of the cock
of the Tu‘u, the warrior Toari.

He gathered his warriors, took the child with him, and marched
against Toari’s bands. When they were in the enemy’s presence,
he gave two javelins to his son and told him to throw them at
Toari. His son’s dream had not been in vain: Toari fell dead, like
the cock. His desire for vengeance satisfied, Kainga left the battle-
field; but the people of Tu‘u, infuriated by the death of their chief,

--- PAGE 236 ---
EASTER ISLAND MYTHS AND LEGENDS 215

charged the Tupa-hotu, who fled in all directions. Among the fugi-
tives was another son of Kainga, Rau-hiva-aringa-erua | Rau-hiva-
of-the-double-face]. The face he had at the back said to him: ‘I see
Pau-aure-vere coming, he has a javelin in his hand, he is going to
kill me. Face that is in front, look!’ But the front face replied:
‘What do I care, back face, I don’t want to see.’ While the two
faces were arguing, Rau-hiva was killed. He died because of his
two faces and their argument.

The defeated Tupa-hotu took refuge, some on the islet of Marotiri,
some in the cave of Ana-te-ava-nui, in the face of the Poike cliff.

The Miru sent canoes to the island of Marotiri to kill all the
enemy within reach. They came back laden with dead, whom they
put down in rows on the beach and distributed among the warriors
of the tribe for their evening meal. Every day the Miru canoes
returned to Marotiri and brought back fresh human flesh.

A Miru warrior, named Oho-taka-tore, came from his village to
the bay of Ana-havea, where the bodies were handed out every day.
He came to the beach just as the canoes back from Marotiri were
unloading the enemies killed during the day. Among the dead,
Oho-taka-tore recognized a Tupa-hotu warrior called Hanga-maihi-
tokerau. Turning to the troop of Miru warriors, he said to them:
‘Comrades, give me the body of the warrior with such a splendid
name. I should like to eat him, because his name is sweet in my
ears.’ Poie, the leader of one of the canoe teams, said to him: ‘Oho-
taka-tore, the body of the warrior with the beautiful name shall not
be yours. Why did you come when evening was falling?’ Without
a word, Oho-taka-tore took off his feather diadem, put it on upside
down, and went away. The people said: “Oho-taka-tore is certainly
angry. What is he going to do?’

Oho-taka-toré had a daughter married to a Tupa-hotu man
named Moa. He sent for her and asked her: “Does your husband
still think of the Tupa-hotu people?’ ‘Father, why do you ask me
such questions?—you know very well. Do you think your son-ip
law shares with me his thoughts about his people?’ ‘Go and fetch
him, my daughter, and tell him to think of his tribe, which is hard
pressed by the Miru.’ And he revealed to his daughter a plan that
was going to do great harm to the Miru and bring joy and life to
the Tupa-hotu.

--- PAGE 237 ---
216 EASTER ISLAND

This is what happened on the island of Marotiri that same night-
A Miru warrior was keeping watch there, killing every Tupa-horu
who ventured to the foot of the rock. Kainga, a Tupa-hotu warrior,
observed him from the summit of the idee Now, Kainga's son,
Uri-avai, had taken advantage of the moonless night to swim to the
islet, where his father was waiting for him. He came ashore unsus-
pecting. Vaha, who had heard him swimming, asked him: *Who
are you?” ‘Uri-avai,” he replied, ‘I am Uri-avai.’ ‘And [ am Uri-
avai’s cnemy,’ retorted Vaha. So saying, he thrust his obsidian
javelin into his throat. Kainga had recognized his son's voice and

heard his body fall. Vaha swam towards the main island, drag-
ging the corpse along with him. Kainga followed him. He saw him

ing along the beach. ‘If he manages to get into the interior of
the island he will be safe, but if he close to me, woe betide
him.’ At that moment, Vaha drew close to him and Kainga called
out to him: ‘Who are you?’ ‘Vaha, the enemy of Uri-avai,’ came
the reply. ‘I am Kainga, the enemy of Vaha," said Kainga, trans-
fixing him with his javelin. Kainga took his child on his shoulder,
wept his death, and buried him in a little ahu called Ainini. Then
he swam back to the islet of Marotiri, dragging Vaha’s corpse be-
hind him. The Tupa-hotu who had stayed there were dying of
rs Great was their joy, therefore, when they saw the corpse
of Vaha. Alas, they had no fire! To eat it, they warmed this human
separa oa their legs. They devoured it
with relish.

Oho-taka-tore’s daughter had given Moa her father’s message.
Moa said nothing, but went and fetched potatocs from a ficld. He
cooked them and put them in a fishing net. That night he left the
house very sccretly and went to Poike, where the Ana-te-ava-nui
cave is. The Tupa-hotu who had taken refuge there were in great
danger of extermination. The enemy had lowered a net from the
top of the cliff containing warriors, who hurled javelins into the
cave, killing those who were near the entrance. In order to hold out
longer, the warriors in the cavern had placed the women and
children and all those of no use in the war in front. When these
had all been killed by the javelins, thirty warriors who refused to
surrender were left in the grotto. Moa did not climb down the cliff
at once. He stopped by a nize tree, from which he cut eight branches

--- PAGE 238 ---
EASTER ISLAND MYTHS AND LEGENDS 217

and added them to the load he carried on his shoulders. Then he
walked along the crest of the cliff and observed that the Miru had
dug holes in which they were sleeping. He went down the face of
the cliff and came to the entrance of a cave. The sentinels asked:
‘Who are you?’ He replied: ‘I am Moa.’ Then they wept, saying:
‘Alas, young man, come here.’ But Moa told them to cease weeping
and take his load before dawn came. Moa distributed the provisions
he had brought with him and made them eat the food to recover
their strength. Then he asked them: ‘Where are the bones of Pere-
roki-roki?” They showed him at the foot of the cliff a heap of bones
from which the flesh had just rotted away. He commanded that
they should be fetched. With the bones he made hooks, which he
fixed to the ends of the eight branches. Then he explained to the
warriors in the cavern the plan he had in his head: ‘When the
enemy lower the nets with the warriors to throw javelins into the
cave, catch the net with these hooks; kill those who are inside it;
put yourself in their place; and have yourselves hoisted to the top
of the cliff. There fall upon the enemy and wipe out the Miru, but
spare the members of my family.’ At these words Moa began to
weep for the sufferings of his people. ‘Farewell,’ he said, ‘I shall
come back, unless the enemy take me prisoner.’

Moa managed to reach the top of the cliff without being seen. He
dipped his net in the sea, covered it with seaweed and other detritus,
and returned to his wife’s village as though he had simply been out
fishing. At dawn, the Miru, as usual, let down a net containing
two warriors. It was caught by the eight grapnels and pulled into
the cave, where the two Miru entangled in its meshes were put to
death. With the help of the ropes and the net, the Tupa-hotu
reached the top of the cliff and killed the warriors who were on
guard. The Miru, taken by surprise, fled, and the Tupa-hotu went
in pursuit, killing everyone and sparing only the young women,
encouraging one another with the words: “Choose your women,
I’m not shy.’ The only people to be spared were the relatives of
Moa. They fled like the rest, but the Tupa-hotu called after them:
‘Do not tire your knees so. Stay where you are, no harm will be
done to you.’

The thirty Tupa-hotu came level with the island of Marotiri.

There was great rejoicing on the island. ‘We have covered our

--- PAGE 239 ---
218 EASTER ISLAND

ovens with the leaves of the mountain,’ they shouted derisively,
meaning by these words that they had eaten raw flesh warmed
under their arms and between their legs. They dived into the water,
attacked the Miru on the shore, joined forces with the others, and
shared in the great massacre. Only the pretty women were spared.

Kainga pursued Poie fiercely, chasing him across the whole
island. But just as the Tupa-hotu were going to seize the van-
quished chief, Kainga called to them: ‘No, leave him, so that this
game can go on.”

The Tupa-hotu men begot children with the Miru women. The
Miru also had children. The years passed, the children of yesterday
had become young men skilled in handling the javelin, when war
broke out again.

The young Tupa-hotu went to the house of Poie, who had been
spared in the other war. They wanted to kill him. Poie was not at
home, but fishing at sea. His father-in-law was a bad man without
honour. He said to the Tupa-hotu: ‘If I am out of doors with my
bald head exposed to the sun, it means that Poie is at sea; but if I
stay irfdoors, come, for it will be a sign that Poie is at home.’

His daughter, Poie’s wife, heard these words and ran to the
shore. When she saw her husband, she cried to him: ‘O Poie-nui-
nui-a-tuki, the enemy are here. They are many, and your father-in-
law is a man without honour.’ Poie fled, but his enemies hastened
in pursuit and gave him no time to hide. He threw himself into the
sea, to make for one of the off-shore islands; the enemy band swam
after him. Poie’s brothers had joined him, but they were taken and
their throats cut. Poie, seeing his brothers’ blood flowing, cried:
“The blood of my four brothers has mingled in a single sheet.’ Poie
was taken to Orongo. A young boy who was there said: ‘Let this
man be given to me.’ Kainga handed Poie over to him. Bundles of

sugar-canes were tied round him and set on fire. The flames
crackled, and Poie died in fearful agony. When Poie was dead, the
Tupa-hotu again ran through the country of the Miru, killing
everyone they met.

THE ORIGIN OF TATTOOING

The Lizard Woman and the Gannet Woman came from their
house at Hakaraya and went to the bay of Hanga-takaure. The

--- PAGE 240 ---
EASTER ISLAND MYTHS AND LEGENDS 219

Lizard Woman asked: ‘What is the name of this ahu?’ ‘It is
Hanga-takaure, the name of this land,’ answered the Gannet
Woman. ‘What is Hanga-takaure to myself and to two beautiful
women, the Lizard Woman and the Gannet Woman?’ They con-
tinued along the south coast and at each settlement the elder sister,
the Lizard Woman, asked her younger sister, the Gannet Woman,
for the name of the place. When she had been told she always
replied: ‘What is this place to myself, and to two beautiful girls,
the Lizard Woman and the Gannet Woman?’

The two sisters dived into the water and swam to Motu-nui.
They stayed there and slept with the young men Heru and Patu.
They became pregnant, gave birth to children, and reared them
until they were grown. These two women were tattooed on the
thighs, the cheek bones, the throat, the lips, the forearms, the jaws,
and marked with circles on the buttocks.

The husbands went to Poike on the main island and slept with
two other women who became pregnant and gave birth to children.
The husbands returned to Motu-nui.

The children of the Lizard Woman and the Gannet Woman had
been tattooed on the legs and jaws. They went to the main island
and arrived at Orongo. The older one jumped on a stone of unusual
size and shouted: ‘Look at me, brother, as the red new moon.’ The
younger one sprang on a small stone and said: ‘Look at me like the
round moon.’ They went to Vinapu, to Maherenga, and to Papa-
tangaroa-hiro in search of surf-riding. Finally at Otuu they saw
men, women, and children watching the surf-riders and the break-
ing waves. The young men asked the people for surf boards and
went out to where the waves were breaking. A big wave reached its

then came a flat wave; the young men were carried on the
waves and landed on shore. The people shouted: ‘The surf-riders
have landed!’ the young men returned the boards to their owners.
They went away and bathed in fresh water, then sat by a rock.

Two boys went to a well and drew water. The young men, sons
of the Lizard Woman and the Gannet Woman, made a spell and
broke their calabashes. ‘Why have you broken our calabashes?”
asked the boys. ‘We don’t know. Who are you?’ asked the young
men. ‘We are the sons of Heru and Patu,’ replied the young men.
“How could you be sons of Heru and Patu, you are crabs, crayfish

--- PAGE 241 ---
220 : EASTER ISLAND

and octopuses.’ The two men told their father what the young men
had said, and the father said: ‘Go and fetch these young men.’
The two ugly men went to get the young men and er they
went to the house of the father. The two young men went into
anather house where there were two girls, They stayed there and
were fed with chicken, swect potatocs, and fish by the father. They
seized the girls to sleep with them but the girls did not want that.
In’ the morning the girls saw how beautiful the two young men
were and fell in love with them. They seized them and Plled them
about, but the young men did not want them. So the young men
left and went ‘ba. Hanga-nui. The girls followed them to Oro-
hic, to Maio, to Papa-haka-heruru. The young men arrived at Val-
karanga and entered a long feast-house for boys and girls. Inside
were two ugly girls called Angu, who were jealous when they saw
the good-looking girls called Hangu-arai, and decided to deceive
them. All the girls went to the shore to bathe. The ugly Angu said:
‘Let us go to the rocks and jump.’ The Hangu-arat girls replied:
*You jump first and we will jump after you.’ One of the Ange
jumped. ‘May she sleep on the rock,’ said the Hangu-arai.
other ugly Angu said: ‘She is dead.’ ‘No she is just asleep,’ said the
Hangw-arai, ‘you jump and be finished.’ The other Angu jumped
and died. The Hangu-arai then returned to their husbands, Heru
and Platu.

The two mothers stayed on the island. One day the elder went to
a heap of rock called Rangi-manu and shouted to the sea: ‘You
Vivivivi and Vaovao come and tear me to pieces.’ They came
peat heen she det, Then ee ee

g-

--- PAGE 242 ---
CHAPTER XIV

The Origins of Easter Island Civilization

Most atremrrs to explain the ‘mysteries’ of Easter Island pre-
suppose that the natives living there at the time of its discovery
were not the authors of the civilization whose remains inspire our
wonder. These are commonly attributed to a seine pig pos-
sessing resources and technical means superior to those of the Easter
Islanders of the historical period. The sudden end of this civiliza-

with Captain Cook’s expedition—put an end to the island's pros-
perity aie behind i eneetbed and decadent sopulenee
fodern geographers refuse to sec in this volcanic island the frag-
ment of a continent that has been swallowed - by the Pacific.
The latest theory regarding the origin of the Polynesians, and
hence of the inhabitants of Easter Island, is that put forward by
Thor Heyerdahl, who braved the waters of the Pacific on his raft,
the ‘Kon-Tiki’, to prove its truth. It is not without some hesitation
that I question the links he establishes between Easter Island and
Peru. In the first place, it is hardl fair to dissociate his ideas on
Easter Island from the sum total of his work and conclusions. I do
not intend to embark on a discussion of the peopling of Polynesia
Bra dikes hewcrer, andl arn cheeefore, enpeliel to tinwe tha
debate to questions of detail which, important as y are, are
nevertheless only isolated elements in a t mosaic. There are
times when I find it impossible to accept Heyerdahl’s method or to
sup} sa gra aah rar ion I feel for his vast
ition ani with whi ts his ar, ts,
He has such plang his views that coe heal sncte sea at
not being able to share them.
At the present time, Heyerdahl is on the soil of Easter Island

H 221

--- PAGE 243 ---
222 EASTER ISLAND

seeking to wrest from this much-explored piece of land its ultimate
secret. Fortune, which has so often befriended him, may ne
have reserved for him discoveries that will enable him to ips
debate. If I enter this discussion here it is with the aim of pas
before the reader a brief outline of Heyerdahl’s hypotheses
acquainting him with some of the objections they have raised; but
the question cannot be finally setded until we know the results of
his expedition.

In his monumental work, American Indians in the Pacific. The
Theory behind the Kon-Tiki Expedition, Thor Heyerdahl set out
to show, by drawing numerous parallels of an archacological and
ethnographic nature, that the islands of Polynesia were by
settlers from America. These maritime migrations, he says, were
made in two stages. The first left Peru towards the middle of the
first millennium 4.p. and carried into the Pacific a megalithic type
of civilization, of which Easter Island has pierved he finest
Som oe The first inhabitants of Polynesia, after some centuries
of isolation, were suddenly submerged and partially annihilated by
a new wave of cmigrants, this time from the north-west coast of
North America, where they had evolved a culture closely resemb-
ling that of the Kwakliut and the Haida of British Columbia. This
new colonization of the Pacific islands took place between 1000 and
1300 a.b. The invaders a language from which the modern
Polynesian dialects are derived. These newcomers mingled with

their agnor who, curiously enough, belon largely to
the white race. Heyerdahl is Piate sere hcl bk or
more seal d a group of men, with fair skin, aquiline noses and
bushy beards exercised a decisive influence on the development of
the American civilizations, and in particular on those that Hourished
in the Andes, in ancient Peru. It was these mysterious civilizers
who, having already assumed the white man’s burden, set out on
rafts in quest of new lands, once their mission had been accom-
plished in Peru, The many bearded and fair-skinned Polynesians
described by the first voyagers were, according to this theory, the
descendants of the white men who followed Kon-Tiki-Viracocha in
his conquest of the Polynesian islands. In his reconstruction of the
past of the American continent Heyerdahl proceeds rather in the
manner of Herodotus, who fai ly collected the myths of the

--- PAGE 244 ---
THE ORIGINS OF EASTER ISLAND CIVILIZATION 223

les he visited in order to reconstruct their history and link it up
ith the traditions of Greece.

To my way of thinking, Heyerdah|’s thesis collides with two sets
of facts that cannot be sia of so casily. Firstly, the affinity
between the dialects of Polynesia and the other languages of the
Austronesian group is much closer than he men iad linguists
are struck by “98 similarities of the Polynesian and Indonesian lan-
guages rather than by their differences. Secondly, the prescnce of
Aumerous cultivated plants of Asian origin on the most distant
islands of Polynesia is easily explained if we accept, as we have
done up to the present, that they were brought by the Polynesians.
But they raise a difficult problem if we take Heyerdahl’s view. We
may suppose that, once established in Polynesia, the Indians entered
into contact with the Melanesians or even the Indonesians, and
brought back to their islands plants and skills they did not
in America, But this presupposes that they were able to sail from
West to cast, against the winds and currents, which is expressly
denied by Heyerdahl in formulating his basic premises. His con-
viction that it was difficult, if not almost impossible, for primitive
peoples to sail against wind and currents is a cornerstone of the
theory that led him to undertake his daring voyage.

Heyerdahl is on firmer ground when he compares the great
Easter Island statues with those of the Andean zone. It so happens
that I am writing these lines a few weeks after returning from Tia
huanaco, on the banks of Lake Titicaca, where I re-examined the
few monoliths that rise among the ruins of this famous site. I
sought in vain to discern the slightest stylistic resemblance between
them and the Easter Island moai. In fact it would be difficult to
imagine a more dissimilar artistic tradition. The great images at
San Agustin in Colombia are only. known to me from photographs,
but I doubt whether they have much in common with the great
busts of Mount Rano-raraku.

Of all the points of resemblance Heyerdahl perceives between
ag ent and ancient Peru, the aaa is that which has

pointed out so often before between the seaward-facing facade

of the famous Vinapu aha and the walls of several buildings at

Cuzco dating from pre-Inca times. The latter were constructed,

without mortar, of splendidly polished blocks of stone, some of
.

--- PAGE 245 ---
224 EASTER ISLAND

which fit together with astonishingly neat tenon and mortise joints.
Now, this type of masonry, which occurs in three mausoleums on
Easter Island—those of Vinapu, Ahu-te-peu and Hanga-paukura—
is far from being typical of the island’s architecture. The
resemblance between the two building techniques is deceptive,
because the Easter Islanders have used relatively thin slabs to face
coarse rubble walls, while the Cuzco masons boldly squared solid
blocks of stone. If Indians experienced in stone-masonry had im-

rted their art into Easter Island, it is hardly likely that they would
he applied it to a type of building of which they had no equiva-
lent in their homeland and would have failed to erect temples on
the model of those at Tiahuanaco, Pucara, Cuzco and other famous
sites in Peru and Bolivia.

To continue our critical scrutiny of the parallels between Easter
Island and Peru or South America: a whole chapter of Heyerdahl’s
book is devoted to the problem of the Easter tablets and script.
While he sides with me in the controversy concerning the Asian
origin of the latter, he is quite ready to accept the analogies between
the Easter signs and the picture-writing of the Cuna Indians
pointed out by Heine-Geldern. He doubts whether there was any
direct connexion between the Easter Islanders and the Cuna
Indians, however: in his opinion the Easter script must have been
introduced into the island by Hotu-matu‘a, that is, by the Peruvian
chief who, in his opinion, led the first settlers from America. But
this would imply that the ancient Peruvians had a script. Heyerdahl
does his best to prove this by invoking the very questionable and
much-disputed authority of Montesinos. It is perfectly possible that
the Incas or the peoples who preceded them represented mythical
episodes, and even historical events, on planks of wood; but there
is nothing to suggest that they possessed a script properly so-called.
Archaeology is silent on this point. Under these circumstances, how
can a Peruvian origin be postulated for the Easter Island tablets?
Foreseeing this objection, Heyerdahl replies that two symbols from
the tablets seem to derive from Peruvian art and to portray animals
foreign to the island’s fauna, He Seu aa a bird with a long beak
as the condor and a very schematic anthropomorphic or zoomorphic
sign as the extremely stylized outline of a puma.

The other parallels drawn between Easter Island and Peru seem

--- PAGE 246 ---
THE ORIGINS OF EASTER ISLAND CIVILIZATION 225

to me too vague to consider at any length. The floats made of coni-
cal bundles of reeds employed by Easter Island swimmers resemble
reed floats used on the coast of Peru. A type of Easter Island feather
head-dress does indeed recall the feather diadems of the South
American Indians, but all feather diadems look very much alike the
world over. The Easter Islanders deformed the lobe of the ear and
inserted heavy ornaments, like the Incas of Peru and countless
South American tribes. But these peoples are not the only ones to
merit the name of ‘Long-Ears’. Easter Island stone fish-hooks are
indistinguishable from Californian fish-hooks—but California is
not Peru.

What surprises me is that Easter Island culture does not present
more analogies with the various civilizations of ancient Peru, for
the common elements that have been pointed out are unimportant
and do not provide a very firm basis for Heyerdahl’s thesis. I have
often wondered why the Peruvian Indians did not preserve in the
Pacific the two arts in which they excelled—pottery and weaving.
Since they are supposed to have introduced cotton, why did the:
not make use of it to weave the splendid garments obtained in suc
large numbers from the burial grounds on the Peruvian seaboard?
The list of objects and techniques the Peruvians are said to have
— in the Pacific seems to me very scanty in comparison with

¢ refinement of the Peruvian civilizations disclosed to us by
archaeology.

Faithful to his tendency to see myths as texts possessing strict his-
torical validity, Heyerdahl has submitted Easter Island folklore to a
microscopic examination. According to Easter tradition, the island
was, if not discovered, at least colonized by a great chief named
Hotu-matu‘a, who is credited with having introduced all the plants
cultivated prior to the advent of the Europeans and with having,
inter alia, created most of Easter Island institutions. In Heyerdahl’s
view this semi-mythical account refers to the arrival of a Peruvian
chief who, accompanied by his retinue, discovered Easter Island
and settled there round about the fifth century a.p. This hypothesis
rests entirely on a passage in the version published by Thomson,,
where it says that Hotu-matu‘a came ‘from a group of islands lying
towards the rising sun, and the name of the land was Marae-toe-
hau, the literal meaning of which is the “burial place”. In this land,

--- PAGE 247 ---
226 EASTER ISLAND

the climate was so intensely hot that the people sometimes died
from the effects of the heat and at certain seasons plants and prow-
ing things were scorched and shrivelled up by the pide sun.” As
a cide of Peru this is rather vague. But is this text authorita-
tive at all? Can it be considered a venerable tradition that the Easter
Islanders have handed down from father to son for 1,400 years?
Unfortunately we have proof that this tradition is extremely ques-
tionable and undoubtedly of very recent date. Thomson's principal
yource on Easter Island was a Tahitan named Salmon who had
settled there in 1877. This Salmon had made himself the cicerone
of all visitors to the island, Now, in 1882—four years before Thom-
son’s visit—he told Geiscler that the Easter Islanders came from the
west, from one of the Tuamotu, but he added that some of them
identified Marac-renga, Hotu-matu‘a’s homeland, with the Gala-
pagos. Those who held this opinion had no doubt learnt of the
existence of this archipelago cithcr from the whalers, who visited it
frequently, or from their countrymen triated from Peru, or
from Salmon himself. However they heard of it, we can spot in this
belief the origin of the tradition echoed by Thomson a few
later, It remains to be added that the confusion between Marae
and the Galapagos has not been tuated. Those who
my testimony can read what Father Englert has to say on
the subject. In the very detailed version he gives us of the Hor
matu'a myth there is a ge worth quoting. It concerns a com-
bog: tie leader toe aaeradicn was hay schs Rar wit ERE
aictent- “The wife of Nuku-kehu had remained in Hiva [the
mythical country of Hotu-matu‘a]. Nuku-kehu suffered every time
he saw the sun set in the direction of Hiva, where lived Marama-
kai’

when the text speaks of bananas, taros and sugar-canes, which are
recognized as having been formerly unknown in the New World.

--- PAGE 248 ---
THE ORIGINS OF EASTER ISLAND CIVILIZATION 227

He states quite rightly that modern Easter Islanders believe their
first king brought everything that grows on their island in his
ship's hold. But onc cannot simultaneously ag myth to ges
Geese aiiditics chic heats ty tem is verily ot same myth.

The celebrated Norwegian seafarer uncritically accepts the list
of Easter Island’s fifty-seven kings which figures in Thomson’s
account and the errors in which have been frequently pointed out.
This enables him to place Hotu-matu'a's arrival at about the end
of the fifth century a.p., a date that corresponds to the period at
which the mysterious white men left Peru on rafts in scarch of new
lands, In his eagerness to prove his thesis, he does not even bother
to compare this list with we owe to other authors, with the
aid of which Thomson’s numerous errors can be corrected by cross-
checking, Also basing his opinion on the king-lists, Father Englert,
who has studied Easter Island genealogies closely, came to the con-
clusion that the island was discovered and colonized in the sixteenth
century. There is a difference of a thousand years between his
estimate and Heyerdahl's. Which of them is right, Heyerdahl or
Father Englert? Undoubtedly neither of them, though Father Eng-
lert’s estimate is probably nearer the truth.

The war between the ‘long-cared people’ A eae aay and the
*short-cared people’ (Aanan-momoko) forms the theme of a legend
full of sensational incidents and still popular among the natives of
the island, Numerous versions exist, of unequal value. The one

strictly historical document under a slightly fabulous
real events tha ;

in the course of the seventeenth century—only a few years before
the advent of the whites. To Heyerdah!'s mind the ‘Big-Ears’ cannot
be anyone else than the Indians from Peru, who must have landed
on Easter around 475 a.p. Their ‘long ears’, the tradition of which
has come down to us, immediately su the deformation of the
lobe of the car that earned the Incas of Peru the Spanish nickname
of Orejones, ‘ Big Ears’. The ‘men with short ears’ are to be identi-
fied with the Potussens proper who, after leaving the north-west
coast of North America, scattered over the Pacific, where they

--- PAGE 249 ---
228 EASTER ISLAND

finally reached and conquered Easter Island, Englert supposes that
the ‘people with the big cars’ were Melanesians who came in about
1610 from an island he does not identify. Bérmida, who considers
the Melanesian hypothesis absurd, nevertheless accepts the date, but
regards the ‘Long-Ears’ as Polynesians from some i
island. The historical conclusions drawn from this tale are discon-
certing when we recall that the ‘Long-Ears’, so brutally extermin-
a their rivals in the seventeenth century, were seen and
described by voyagers in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
For at this time all the Easter Islanders had long ears, if by this is
meant that they deformed the lobe of the car so as bar Von
ornaments. Even without this exact evidence, the ears of the
statues and wooden figurines, which are all elongated, would have
told us that this fashion, if not universal, was at least widespread in
those days. The last ‘long-eared’ Easter Islanders died in the second
half of the nineteenth century. Tepano claimed to have known
some and pointed out their descendants.

The legend of the war between the two groups who differed
the shape of their cars contains episodes that are only intelligible if
interpreted as explanations of certain natural jarities
of the Easter landscape. Several versions of the story give the cause
of the conflict as the refusal of the Short-Ears to comply with the
Long-Ears’ order to throw the stones that littered the soil of the
island into the sea. In the district attributed to the Big Ears there is
2 tract of land which, for some geological reason, is not strewn with
the blocks of disintegrated lava that render walking so tiresome
everywhere else. This anomaly must have struck the natives. They
explained it by supposing that a tribe once attempted to tidy up the
island, but was forced to abandon this arduous undertaking. The
pit into which the Short-Ears pushed their enemies and roasted
them corresponds to ‘a gully running from north to south across
the island, with the snout of the lava on one side and the much
higher sea-cut cliffs on the other’. This natural pit suggests a man-
Fee trench. A was natural for the natives to believe that it was

ug by man and to invent a to explain its origin.

Tethe two hostile groups ree beck dtinguithed by the shape
of their ears, this tale would never have caught the attention of
scholars, In my opinion, this anatomical detail is a re-interpretation

--- PAGE 250 ---
THE ORIGINS OF EASTER ISLAND CIVILIZATION 229

of an old tale that was made at a relatively recent period, when the

ive abandonment of the deformation of the lobe of the car
led to the belief that this fashion once corresponded to an ethnic
difference,

But what point is there in devoting so much thought to the

esis of a story, when we know now that the famous menehune
of Hawaii, who were long believed to have been a people that pre-
ceded the ancestors of the present Hawaiians, were actually mythi-
cal beings without any historical reality? There is grave doubt
today as to the accuracy of the celebrated Polynesian genealogies,
which assume a more mythical character the back they go
into the past. What reliance can we place in stories or myths that
belong to popular literature and have only distant connexions with
the religious and historical traditions transmitted by the members of
the priestly caste? This folklore is a poor source of information
concerning the island’s past, and the rare elements of legend it con-
tains are very entary and imperfect. The natives who are still
acquainted with this folk literature have no scruples about introduc-
ing new details gained from visitors with whom they have discussed
their island's past. Lavachery and | gave our Easter Island friends
"an account of their ancestors’ behaviour towards the first voyagers
who landed on the island. I was greatly surprised to find later that
details the Easter Islanders had learnt from us or from other
travellers had slipped into the modern versions of these tales.

The importance ascribed to this legend would be justified if
archacological discoverics had revealed two distinct periods in
Easter Island art or architecture, or if ethnographic analysis had
com us to admit the presence in this culture of clements
totally alien to Polynesia. In the absence of any such evidence, it
seems to me fruitless to attribute an historical character to the story
of the ‘Big and Little Ears’. Here again, instead of starting from
the precise data of archaeology or ethnography and seeking con-
firmation in folklore of the. Badiogs obtained by other methods,
investigators have Searn to rely on a vague popular tradition in
making assertions for which there is absolutely no genuine proof. It
is perfectly obvious that the Easter Island monuments have been
erected by one and the same population. The different types of ahu
and the two categories of statues are normal variations within the

H* :

--- PAGE 251 ---
230 EASTER ISLAND

framework of a single culture, and do not effect its homogeneity.
The innumerable stone adzes collected on the island are spe
ally linked with specimens found in Eastern Polynesia and might
very well have been made and used by Polynesians sharing a com-
mon technical heritage with their brothers on the Marquesas and
Mangareva.

This is perhaps the moment to recall once more a fact we
observed on Easter Island, which, though it may seem insignificant
at first sight, is none the less a vitally important piece of evidence.
The bases on which several of the great ahu statues stand have been
shored up with slabs of stone which are nothing else than the lower
courses of the huts described earlier on and which were in use in
the mid-nineteenth century. In other words, the builders of the ahu
and the sculptors of the great statues lived in huts identical with
those described by La Pérouse in 1786. This simple detail by itself
demolishes a good many theories concerning the great antiquity of
Easter Island culture and the disappearance at some distant time of
the men who carved the statues.

The ahu or stone mausoleums on which the great statues rose are
only a local variant of the great sanctuaries or marae of Eastern
Polynesia, whose platforms also bore the name ahuz. Moreover, if
we pass into the domain of linguistics, we find that the dialect of
Easter Island is almost indistinguishable from Maori, Mangarevan
and Marquesan. Furthermore, if a people speaking a non-Poly-
nesian language had mingled with the Easter Islanders, its language
could not have vanished without leaving at least a few traces. But
no one has yet detected in the Easter vocabulary or toponomy any
survivals of a foreign tongue.

The humorous legend of the war between the Big Ears and the
Little Ears would not have aroused so much interest if many
scientists had not considered the Easter Islanders racially different
from other Polynesians and as showing certain points of resem-
blance to the Melanesians. This hypothesis, which has been vigor-
ously disputed, has recently been revived by Imbelloni. It runs
counter to the findings of Dr Harry “tie our best authority on
Polynesian physical anthropology, who has studied the population
of Easter Island on the spot.

It is true that Easter Island skulls are ‘hypsistenocephalic’, that is,

‘

--- PAGE 252 ---
THE ORIGINS OF EASTER ISLAND CIVILIZATION 231

both high and narrow, and that in some respects they resemble
Loyalty Island crania, but this, in Dr Shapiro’s opinion, does not
mean that Easter Islanders are Melanesians or mixed Melanesian
and Australoid influences—as Imbelloni and various other crani-
ologists have suggested. Much of the evidence rests on the con-
nexion with Loyalty Island and from that it is generalized to
‘Melanesians’. The cranial material from Loyalty Island is con-
sidered by Wagner, of whom Imbelloni approves, to be possibly an
intrusion or fe: at from early Polynesians. So, if Wagner is cor-
rect, the cranial resemblances would be through Polynesian diffu-
sion, not the other way round. Moreover, the blood group
frequencies on Easter Island are typically Polynesian (low or absent
for B, which is in marked contrast to the general Melanesian situa-
tion). Melanesians, apart from cranial characters, are dark skinned,
with frizzy hair, and prognathic. None of these traits are typical of
Easter Islanders. But even if it could be proved beyond any doubt
that the Easter Islanders showed traces of intermingling with
Melanesians this would not necessarily imply that they represent a
local and special mixture of the two races. The admixture of
Melanesian ‘blood’ might well date from a period prior to the
arrival of the Easter Islanders’ ancestors in their new country. The
‘Melanesian’ traits in Easter Island are not different from those
found elsewhere in Polynesia, for example in the Marquesas.

The British anthropologist, Henry Balfour, has likewise sup-
sa the thesis of a Melanesian origin of Easter Island culture,

sing his view on ethnographic arguments. His article has often
been quoted and has exercised a certain influence on the prevalent
conception of Easter Island culture. I do not wish to involve the
reader in a barren ethnographic discussion, but I cannot altogether
avoid it if the problem is to be examined from every side.

The connexions Balfour traces between the cultures of Easter
Island and Melanesia are as follows:

(t) Obsidian points identical with the Easter Island javelin heads
have been found in the Yoda Valley, New Guinea; (2) the aquiline
nose of the Easter Island wooden statuettes recalls the noses of the
Papuans; (3) the deformation of the lobe of the ear among the
Easter Islanders is typical of various Melanesian tribes. Similarly
the protruding mouth of the great statues recalls the treatment of

--- PAGE 253 ---
232 EASTER ISLAND

the lips on certain canoe-prow figures in the Solomons; (4) bird-men
are common in both Easter Island and Solomon Island art; (5) the
frigate bird is a motif found with equal frequency in Easter Island
and the Solomons; (6) the ‘hats’ of red tufa worn by the statues
suggest the artificially discoloured hair of the Melanesians.

These parallels are vague and a trifle inconsistent. What impor-
tance should be attached to a few obsidian points discovered in an
isolated spot in New Guinea? The resemblance between the Melan-
esian specimens and those from Easter Island lies primarily in the
identical nature of the material. There are no obsidian deposits in
Polynesia except in New Zealand, Pitcairn and Easter Island. We
are compelled to assume either that the Polynesian emigrants who
settled in Easter Island came from the Yoda Valley in New Guinea,
or that they discovered the use that could be made of obsidian on
Easter Island itself, where there is a qu: of this material. In New
Guinea the use of obsidian is restricted, for only the natives of the
Admiralty Islands have specialized in this industry. Now, there is
almost no analogy between the obsidian blades of the Admiralty
Islands and those of Easter Island. It seems practically certain that
the use of obsidian was a particular development of stone-working
that took place on Easter Island.

No physical anthropologist would dream of establishing racial
connexions on the basis of resemblances between statues carved in a
conventional style. Balfour himself admits the extreme frailty of his
hypothesis and recognizes that the particular shape of the nose in
the Easter Island statuettes is due to the attempt to depict the face
of a corpse.

Attention has quite rightly been drawn to the resemblance
between the figurines of the Moriori on the New Zealand Chatham
Islands and those of Easter Island. Although different in style, both
sets of images represent emaciated figures with protruding ribs.
Starting from the supposition that the Moriori were Polynesians
interbred with Melanesians, investigators have once more inferred .
that the Easter Island statuettes were Melanesian in character. This
deduction is fundamentally unsound, since no one has proved that
the Moriori are anything but a Maori tribe. What right has any-
body to describe as ‘Melanesian’ a type of statuette that does not
exist in Melanesia? As for the likeness that Balfour sees between

--- PAGE 254 ---
THE ORIGINS OF EASTER ISLAND CIVILIZATION 233

the mouth of the Easter Island statues and that of the Solomon
Island canoe-prow figures, this is an inadequate piece of evidence
on which to establish a link between the two arts.

Both the Easter Islanders and the natives of the Solomon Islands
wished to portray the frigate bird with outstretched wings as real-
istically as possible—it is not surprising, therefore, that a certain
similarity may be traced between the resulting motifs, which is
quite fortuitous.

Analogies between a few features chosen at random from vast
regions known for the diversity of their local cultures cannot fail to
be superficial and unconvincing. In no fundamental aspect of their
art, religion or social organization do Easter Island and Melanesia

t common characteristics that would justify the hypothesis of

ific link between this tiny Polynesian island and the multi-
farious cultures of Melanesia. If we admit that Melanesia was the
centre of a civilization superior to that which developed in Poly-
nesia, it is easy to understand the desire to link it up with Easter
Island; but there is nothing among the Papuans or the Melanesians
properly so-called to indicate that they were the inaugurators or
precursors of Easter Island culture.

Some investigators have claimed that Easter Island civilization
was of a ‘matriarchal’ type and therefore different from the funda-
mentally patrilinear, partriarchal Polynesian cultures. The facts cited
in support of this thesis do not stand up to examination. It is not
true that the soil was cultivated exclusively by the women, nor that
ownership of the fields was transmitted fon mother to daughter.
Inheritance passed down the male line, as elsewhere in Polynesia.
The predominantly vegetable dict is not an indication of an essenti-
ally NE of civilization, for this diet was imposed on
the islanders by oe imind resources of their habitat. It was im-

ible to develop fishing to the same extent as on other islands,
reasons that have already been discussed.

If the homogencity and distinctly Polynesian character of Easter
Island culture seem to be beyond question, it still remains to estab-
lish the place of origin of the settlers who colonized the island and
the date of their migration. In undertaking this investigation, it is
important to bear in mind one fact that has long been ized.
Although the native cultures of Polynesia all rest on a common

--- PAGE 255 ---
234 EASTER ISLAND

base, each one has nevertheless developed in its isolation peculiar-
ities that give it an original quality of its own.

All the fundamental aspects of the Polynesian cultures recur on
Easter Island. As might have been expected from its geographical
position, Easter Island culture is linked with the eastern group of
the Polynesian islands. None of the distinctive elements of Western
Polynesia figure on Easter Island, whereas most of the techniques
and traditions that characterize the Eastern Polynesians form part
of the Easter Islanders’ heritage.

The cultural analogies between Easter Island and the Gambiers
(Mangareva), the closest of the Polynesian islands, are very remark-
able. We may mention, as examples, the ahu or stone platforms with
their mortuary vaults, the paved areas in front of Ri, houses, the
canoes with raised prows and poops, the seclusion of the chief’s
children, the practice of tattooing the whole body, the use of the
words ivi-atua for ‘priest’ and hurumanu for ‘commoner’, and
finally the existence of chanters called rongorongo.

Father Honoré Laval, who knew the Mangareva culture at a time
when it was still intact, notes that the wooden images representing
gods had ‘tight-lipped, set mouths like a miser’s. At other times
one would have said the god was pouting.’ This quotation immedi-
ately calls to mind the famous “disdainful pout’ of the great statues
of Ranoraraku. Lavachery has succeeded in proving a stylistic
affinity between one of the rare Mangarevan statues extant and a
statue from Easter Island housed in the Musée du Cinquantenaire,
Brussels. My colleague concludes from this analogy that Mangar-
evans might have settled on the island and were perhaps the “Long
Ears’ referred to in the legend we have discussed at such length.
The hypothesis of a Mangarevan origin of the inhabitants of Easter
Island comes up against certain difficulties. The Easter Islanders
did not use the word marae for their sanctuaries, but retained the
term ahu, whose original meaning was ‘cairn of stones, stone plat
form’. This apparently insignificant linguistic detail proves that
they had not joined together the sacred forecourt (marae) and the
platform (ahu)—a development in religious architecture that
occurred in Mangareva as well as in Central Polynesia (Fig. 6).
Finally the Easter Islanders cannot have come from Mangareva
because the inhabitants of this archipelago did not possess the

--- PAGE 256 ---
THE ORIGINS OF EASTER ISLAND CIVILIZATION 235

Fig. 6. Easter Island aku (a) com with religious stone

structures from castern Polynesia; (b) Mangaravean marae; and

(c and d) Tahitian marae. After Emory: Polynesian Stone
Remains, Plates Ia and IV.

--- PAGE 257 ---
236 EASTER ISLAND

chicken. On the other hand, they kept pigs, which were unknown
on Easter Island.

If the Gambier Islands (Mangareva) cannot be considered as the
place from which the Easter idanders came, it seems that Marae-
renga, their mythical homeland, can only have been the Marquesas.
The low coral islands of the Tuamotu group are ruled out of court
by the fact that the plants cultivated by the Easter Islanders all
belong to high islands of volcanic origin.

The Marquesan culture, as we know it, differs in many respects
from that of Easter Island; but the characteristics that distinguish it
are precisely those which mark the Marquesas off from other Poly-
nesian cultures. It would be just as unwarranted to project the aber-
rant aspects of this culture into the past as to regard the arts and
techniques of the nineteenth-century Maoris as being those of their
ancestors at the time they emigrated from Tahiti.

The ahu and mea‘e of the Marquesas are not as different from
the Easter Island ahu as they may at first sight appear. Their irregu-
lar arrangement springs from the difficulties the architects encoun-
tered when they sought to combine platform and forecourt on the
steep slopes of their mountains. On the other hand the Marquesan
sanctuaries, like the mausoleums of Easter Island, show the plat-
form in which the dead were interred and the rows of statues
representing the ancestors. As a matter of fact the style of the Mar-
Thao statues is not that of the Easter Island moai, but they prob-
ably reflect artistic traditions that emerged after the period of the
migration. It is the same with Marquesan tattooing which, like that
of Easter Island, covered the whole body, but in a different style.
The tiki or human figure with large eyes, which is one of the basic
motifs of Marquesan art, was not foreign to that of Easter Island,
where we found it engraved on numerous petroglyphs and where
it appears on the tablets.

The association between the chants and certain objects that sym-
bolized them may also be regarded as a parallel between the two
cultures. Looked at from this angle, the knotted cords of the Mar-
quesas correspond to Easter Island’s engraved tablets.

If the Easter Islanders came from the Marquesas Islands, their
migration must go back a very long way, probably to a period
‘ghee Marquesan culture Gas call aeditieeacitted ai dtatiar to

--- PAGE 258 ---
THE ORIGINS OF EASTER ISLAND CIVILIZATION 237

that of the Mangarevans and Maoris in the thirteenth century.
From all this we can formulate the following Darien The
many analogies between Easter Island culture and the various cul-
tures of central and marginal Polynesia cannot be interpreted as
proofs of diffcrent migrations and diverse influences. These parallels
can only be explained by supposing that the inhabitants of Easter
Island left Central Polynesia at an early date—probably in the
twelfth century—before these peoples had had time to develop dis-
te cultures. Tuamotuans, garevans, Marquesans and
oris must, at some point in their history, have in ited a com-
mon fatherland and possessed a homogencous culture, After cen-
turies of isolation in the various islands they discovered and
occupied as a result of their migrations, they modéed their cultural
heritage, developing certain of its aspects and abandoning others.
The numerous analogies between the Maoris and the Easter
Islanders tend to prove that they left Central Polynesia at approxi-
mately the same time, that is to say, before the ahu and the marae
had been combined and before Tangaroa had become the principal
god in the mythology.

The Easter I $s formed of the waves of migration that
flowed east and occupied the Marquesas, the Gambiers and the
Tuamotus. After remaining on the Marquesas for a few genera-
tions, one or two tribes belonging to this ancient population broke
away from it and went in search of new islands to the east. Chance
brought them to Easter Island, where they settled. Navigation
degenerated on Easter Island because of the shortage of timber.
The scarcity of this material rendered it precious and partly explains
the importance assumed by wood-carving. Wooden articles had the
same value for Easter Islanders as those of jade or whale ivory in

New Zealand and the Marquesas.
Ev region of Polynesia has specialized in some form of art, to
which it has sought to give more and more expression. The

valid for Polynesia, it a s less exceptional and less con! to
Recratacinane He: picnics b ree

--- PAGE 259 ---
238 EASTER ISLAND

great statues also represent a specialization of Easter Island culture,
a specialization unease eae local conditions. That is how
a group of Polynesians, undoubtedly oceans fe oe mae
quesa’s, m this tiny island, most isolated in the
Seth Sing & ew and cogs Bre foie cies aoe
inherited from their ancestors in Central Polynesia.

--- PAGE 260 ---
Selected Bibliography on Easter Island’

Batrour, Henry: ‘Some Ethnological Suggestions in regard to
Easter Island or Rapanui’ (in Folklore, London, vol. 28, 1917,
Pp- 356-381). _ ; : :

Begcuey, Frederick William: Narrative of a Voyage to the Pacific
and Beering’s Straits. London, 1831, 2 vols.

Béraapa, Marcelo: ‘Algunas luces sobre la penumbrosa historia de
Pascua antes de 1722.’ (In Runa, Buenos Aires, vol. 4, 1951, pp-
5-62).

“Somatologia de la Isla de Pascua’ (in Runa, Buenos Aires, vol. 4.
pp- 178-222). f ‘

Brown, John Macmillan: The Riddle of the Pacific. London, T. F. ,
Unwin, 1924.

Camus Gunpian, Daniel: ‘Salubridad y morbilidad en la Isla de
Pascua’ (in Runa, Buenos Aires, vol. 4, 1951, pp. 78-88).

Coox, James: Second Voyage towards the South Pole and round
the World, performed in the ‘Resolution’ and ‘Adventure’,
1772-75. London, 1777-

Emory, Kenneth P.: ‘Polynesian Stone Remains’ (in Papers of the
Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University, vol. xx, Cambridge, Mass., 1943, pp- 9-21).

Enctert, P. Sebastian: Tradiciones de la Isla de Pascua en idioma
rapanui y castellano. Padre Las Casas, impr. y edit. “San Fran-
cisco’, 1939.

La tierra de Hotu-Matu‘a. Historia, etnologia y lengua de la Isla
de Pascua. Padre Las Casas, impr. y edit. ‘San Francisco’, 1948.

Forster, George: A Voyage round the World in H.B.M.’s Sloop
‘Resolution’ during the year 1772. London, 1777.

Getserer, Kapitanlieutnant: Die Oster Insel, eine Statte prahistor-
ischer Kultur in der Siidsee. Berlin, E. S. Mittler und Sohn, 1883.
1 The literature on Easter Island is very abundant. The reader will find

in my Ethnology of Easter Island a full bibliography up to 1940. The present

selected bibliography includes our most important sources on the ethno-
logy of Easter Island and recent articles which I have utilized or discussed

in chapters XII and XIV.
239

--- PAGE 261 ---
240 EASTER ISLAND

GonzAuez y Hasno, Felipe: The voyage of Captain Don Felipe
Gonsilez in the Ship of the Line ‘San Lorenzo’ with the Frigate
‘Santa Rosalia’ in Company to Easter Island, in 1770-1801,
preceded by an Extract from Mynheer Jacob Roggeveen’s Liars
Log of his Discovery of and Visit to Easter Island in 1772, tran:
scribed, translated and edited by Bolton Glanvill Corney .
Cambridge, printed for the Hakluyt Society, 1908.

Giwrner, Klaus: ‘Zur Frage der T ape und Chronologie der

Steinbilder auf Ostertasel” (in Wissentschaftliche

Datschrif der Friedrich-Schiller-Universitat Jena, Jahrgang, 3,
1933/54, pp- 81-107).

Heine-Gurpexn, Robert von: ‘Dic Osterinselschrift’ (in Anthro-
fos St Gabriel Modling, vol. 33, 1938, pp. 815-909).
“Some Problems of Migration in the Pacific’ (in

un
Sprache, shed b Ko; in collaboration with R-
Heel aad Jeph Has, Wi, Hoo 5
313-362)
"Hey a ypothesis of Polynesian Origins: a Criticism’ (in
The Gapronhiea! Journal, London, vol. 116, Nos. 4-6, 1950,

183-192).
ites mz, Hans: Die Osterinsel. Zirich, Frets und Wasmuth,
es 94 plates.
Eisvenn pg de: ‘Sur une écriture océanienne sant

dorigine area cian ye nego pratisy cus De
Heyeapant, Thor eo), the Pacific. Stockholm,

“Some AB Aboriginal Migration in the Pacific.’ (in
Archiv fiir Volkerkunde, Beihefe, zu vols. 6~7, Wien, 1952.)
Impetiont, José: ‘Las ‘Tabletas Parlantes’ de Pascua, monumentos
de un sistema grifico indo-ocednico’ (in Runa, Buenos-Aires, vol.
4 195% pp. 89-177).
= Gag rear (in Runa, Buenos-Aires, 1951,
22
Recaro. G. H. R. yon: ‘Uber sumatranische Schiffstiicher
und ihre erp 2 zur Kunst Oceaniens’ (in Siidseestudien.

Gedenkschrift zur Erinnerung an Felix Speiser. Basel, 1951, pp-
27-30).

--- PAGE 262 ---
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY ON EASTER ISLAND 241

La P£rouse, Jean Francois de Galaup, Cte de: Voyage de La
Pérouse autour du monde (1785-1788). Paris, impr. de la
République, an.V (1797).

Lavacuery, Henri: Ile de Péques. Paris, B. Grasset, 1935.

Les pétroglyphes de I'lle de Péques. Anvers, De Sikkel, 1939.
“Sculpteurs modernes de I’Ile de Paques’ (in Outre-Mer, Paris,
vol. 9, Dec. 1937, pe. 325-365). ; 4
‘Stéles et pierres-levées 4 I’Ile de Paques’ (in Siidseestudien.
Gedenkschrift zur Erinnerung an Felix Speiser. Basel, 1951, pp-
413-422). es A :

Lavat, le P. Honoré: Mangareva, l'histoire ancienne d'un peuple
polynésien. Paris, P..Geuthner, 1938.

Mérraux, Alfred: ‘Ethnology of Easter Island.’ (Bernice P. Bishop
Museum, Honolulu, Bulletin 160, 1940).

RoccEvEEN, Jacob: (see GonzAtez y Harpo.)

Rourtence, Katherine Scoresby: The Mystery of Easter Island; the
Story of an Expedition. London, Sifton, Praed & Co., 1919.
‘Survey of the Village and Carved Rocks of Orongo, Easter
Island, by the Mana Expedition’ (in Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute, London, vol. 50, 1920, pp. 425-451).

Santis, Marshall D.: ‘Esoteric Efflorescence in Easter Island’ (in
American Anthropologist. Menasha, vol. 57, 1955, Pp- 1045-1052).

Suapmo, H. L.: ‘The Physical Relationships of the Easter Islanders’
(in Métraux, Ethnology of Easter Island, Bernice P. Bishop
Museum, Bulletin 160, pp. 24-30, Honolulu, 1940).

Tuomson, William Judah: ‘Te Pito te Henua; or Easter Island’ (in
Smithsonian Institution. Annual Report of the National Museum
for 1889, Washington, 1891, pp. 447-552).

Waener, K.: ‘The Craniology of the Oceanic Races’ (in Viden-
skaps-Academi i Oslo Skrifter Mat. Naturv. Klasse No. 2, Oslo,

1937-

Several important articles written by Russian scholars on the
subject of the Easter Island tablets were received as this book went
to press, They are:

Kupriatsev, B. G.: ‘Pie’mennoct’ ostrova Pachu’ (in Sbornik

Museya antropologii i etnografii, vol. X1, 1949, pp. 176-221).
Oxperocce, D. A.: ‘Paralleln’ye teksty tablic ostrova Pachu’ (in

--- PAGE 263 ---
242 EASTER ISLAND

Sbornik Museya antropologii i etnografii, vol. X1, 1949, pp. 222—

236). _

*Paralleln’ye teksty nekotoryh tabluc ¢ ostrova Pachu’ (in
Sovetskaja Etnogrufija, vol. 1V, Academy of Science of USSR,
Moscow and ary fae 1947) PP: 234-238).

Burimov, N. A. and Knozozoy, Ry tminary Report on the
Study of the Written Language of Easter Island (a paper read
in May 1956, in Leningrad, at the All-Union Conference of
Ethnologists).

--- PAGE 264 ---
INDEX

Adolescence, 107-11

Adoption, custom of, 110

Adultery, punishment for, 116

Adzes, stone, 230

Agriculture, 64-6

Abu (fanerary platforms), 31, 118-
119, IjO-1, 229-30; origin of

logies, 128-30; wooden images
of, 144-8

Andes, Indians of the, 201

irik (term for nobility), 87, 112-
133, 175

Aymara Indians, 201

Balfour, Henry, 231, 232

Bartel, Dr Th. S., 206-7

Basalt, used for carving of statues,
152

Beechey, F. W., 43-5, 79) 133

Beri, Gabricl Beri, sculptor, 147

Bernizer, M., 75

Bird-man cult, 130-9

Birth, rites observed at, 104-5

Boats. See Canocs

Bérmido, Marcelo, 228

Bornier, Dutroux-, French adven-
turer, 56-7

Brander, Mr, 56, $7

Brown, J. Macmillan, 31-2

Cannibalism, 162-3

Canoes, 70

Caroline Archipelago, alleged cul-
tural analogy with Easter Is., 199

Caves, Se Grottoes

Ceylon, alleged cultural analogy
with Easter Is., 198-9

cence, 107-11

Chile: annexes Easter Is., $7; de-

ports politicians to the island, 58;

sad Seaie Compaaicgorenos
ship, 58-9

China, alleged origins of Polyne-
sian civilization in, 196-7, 199, oz

Christianity, introduction of, 47-55

Civil wars, 47

Climate, 63

Clothing, 76, 79-80

Cook, Captain, 40, 62, 111, 112,
149, 151, 156, 158, 277

Dancing, 176, 181-2

Davis, Edward, 29

Davis Land, 29, 39

Death and funerals, 116-19; mor-
tuary ceremonies, t72

243

--- PAGE 265 ---
244

Demons, 121-3
Division of labour, 115
Divorce, 115-16
Dixon, 33

Domestic animals, 66-7
Dress. See Clothing

Easter Island: and the lost conti-
nent, 29-30; volcanic origins,
30-1; area, 31; theory of its
being centre of an archipelago,
31-2; mixed blood in, 33; various
names given to, 36-7; first dis-
covery by a European, 38-9;
second discovery, 39-40; an-
nexed by Spain, 40; Cook’s visit,
40; La Pérouse’s visit, 40-2;
abduction of islanders by Ameri-
can ship Nancy, 42; Kotzebue’s
visit, 43; Beechey’s visit, 43-5;
visits of du Petit-Thouars and
Moerenhout, 45; killing of wo-
men by whaler Pindos, 45-6;
slave raiders in, 46-7; smallpox
in, 47; civil wars, 47; introduc-
tion of Christianity, 47-55; out-
rages and depopulation under
Dutroux-Bornier, 55-7; annexed
by Chile, 57; decline, 57-8; Ger-
man naval contacts in First World
War, 58; under governorship of
Sefior Cumprido, 58-9; popula-
tion, 59, 64; health, 59-60;
modernization, 60; climate, 63;
scarcity of fresh water, 65-6;
domestic animals, and rats as
food, 66-7; raw materials, and
creative activities, 80-2

INDEX

See also Agriculture; Birth;
Children; Death; Feasts; Fish and
Fishing; Flora; Marriage; Ori-
gins of Easter Island civilization;
Religion; Sex Life; Social Struc-
ture; Statues; Tablets; Tabus

Englert, Father Sebastian, 59, 139,

226-8

Eyraud, Brother Eugéne, 48-55,

71-2, 79, 120, 142, 146, 175, 178,
183, 188

Feasts: huts for family celebrations,

tog; place in social life, 171;
dialect word for, 171-2; the
paina in honour of dead father or
brother, 172; the Aoro in honour
of living relatives, 172-4; the
hareauti or profane feasts, 174-6;
the puka and kaunga, 176; in
celebration of visiting ships, 176-
177

Feminine beauty, ideal of, 42

Figurines. See Sculpture

Fish and fishing, 67-70, 167

Food, 72-4

Forster, George, 169, 221

Frazer, Sir J. G., 139

Funerals, 116-19

Funerary platforms. See Ahu

Gambier Islands. See Mangareva

Games and Sports, 106-7

Gods. See Religion

Gonzalez y Haedo, Felipe, 40, 62,
118, 172 ‘

Gregorio, last King of Easter Is.,
34, 88, 94

--- PAGE 266 ---
INDEX

Grottoes, used as dwellings, 75-6
Guilds, of craftsmen, 95-6
Giinther, Klaus, 161

Hanga-roa village, 112; women of,
114

Hawaiian Islands: geological ori-
gins, 30; settled by Polynesians,
34; their stratified social struc-
ture, 166; the menebune (mythical
ancestors) of, 229

Headgear, 79

Heine-Geldern, Robert yon, 196-
200, 202-3

Hévesy, Guillaume de, 193-5, 200,
202

Heyerdahl, Thor, on origins of
Easter Is. civilization, 221-30

Hieroglyphic writing. See Tablets

Hops (servants of bird-men), 133-6

Hornbostel, Professor, 198

Hotu-matu’a, King, 36, 57, 105;
discoverer and colonizer of Easter
Is., 34, 91-2; legendary introduc-
tion of trees, 62, 88, 225; legen-
dary division of Island among his
sons, 83-4, 211; alleged to have
brought Tablets to the Island,
194; alleged to be a Peruvian
chief, 224, 226-7; legend of his
discovery of the Island, 208-11

Human sacrifice, 127-8

Huru-manu (serfs), 96

Huts and dwellings, 74-6

Imbelloni, Professor José, 198-9,
230-1 <
Incest, punishment for, 113

245

Indonesia, cultural analogy with
Easter Is., 198

Indus civilization, 193-4

Ivi-atua (priest), 94; (medicine men

and sorcerers), 141-3

Jaussen, Monseigneur, Bishop of
Tahiti, 57, 183, 190-1

Kaharoau, legendary figure, 109

Kainga, warrior, legend of, 213-18

Kakoniau, legendary figure, 109

Kamakoi, King, 47

Koenigswald, Professor G. H. R.
von, 198

Koro (feast), 171-2

Koromaki (medicine men and sor-
cerers), 141

Kotzebue, Russian navigator, 43,
149

La Pérouse, Comte de, 40-1, 61-2,
75, 111, 149, 172, 230

Langdon, Professor, 196

Langle, M. de, 169

Language, 34, 230

Layachery, Henri, 147, 161, 196,
229, 234

Laval, Father Honoré, 35, 188, 234

Legends: King Hotu-matu’a’s dis-
covery of Easter Is., 208-11;
War of the Long-Ears and Little-
Ears, 212-13, 225, 227-30, 2343
the great war of the Tu’u and
Hotu-iti confederations, 213-18;
the origin of tattooing, 218-20

Lemont, 177

Leprosy, 59-60

--- PAGE 267 ---
246

Loti, Pierre, 76, 162, 181

Liickner, von, German naval com-
. mander, 58

Magic, 141-3. See also Religion

Malinowski, B., 158

Mana (mystic or vital force), 88-91,
104, I0$, III, 115, 140

Manu-tara (sooty terns), 130

Mangareva (Gambier Islands), 32,
96; settled by Polynesians, 34, 35;
forced over-eating by children in,
109; its stratified social structure,
166; professional chanters in,
188-9; common technical heri-
tage with Easter Is., 230; close
cultural analogies with Easter Is.,
234-6

Manners, 97

Maoris: Polynesian origins, 34, 35;
tattooing amongst, 78, 237; their
stratified social structure, 87, 166;
their god Tane, 127; their canoes,
164; their feasts, 171-2; use of
engraved club by orators and
reciters, 205, 206; wood-carving
and jade work, 237

Marae-renga: King Hotu-matu’a’s
homeland, 62; identification with
Galapagos Islands, 226; identifi-
cation with the Marquesas, 236

Marquesas Islands; geological ori-
gins, 30; settled by Polynesians,
345 tattooing in, 78, 237; poly-

\andry in, 114; the mee (mauso-

leums) of, 119; the god Tiki, 125;
statues on, 158-9; stratified social
structure, 166; professional chan-

INDEX

ters in, 188, 189; artistic script of,
197; liturgical poems and sym-
bolism, 205-6; common technical
heritage with Easter Is., 230;
original home of Easter Islanders,
236-8

Marriage, 113-16

Masafuera Island, 42

Mata-puku, Chief, 35

Mata-to’a (warriors), 96, 100, 133-4

Mataveri, and the bird-man cult,
136

Mausoleums. See Ahu

Medicine-men, 116, 141-3

Melanesia, its alleged cultural analo-
gies with Easter Is., 230-3

Moai kavakava (wooden statuettes),
144

Mortuary ceremonies, 172

Motu-nui, islet of, and the bird-man
cult, 130-3, 135

Murder, rites of vengeance for, 103

Music, 181-2

Myths. See Legends

Neru (enforced idleness for child-
ten), 109-10

New Zealand. See Maoris

Nga’ara, King, 93, 187

Nordenskiéld, Erland, 198

Obsidian: abundance of, 81; de-
velopment of its use, 232

Ojibway Indians, 203, 204

Origins of Easter Is. civilization:
evidence of physical anthropol-
ogy, 33-4; Thor Heyerdahl’s
theory, 221-30; craniology, and

--- PAGE 268 ---
INDEX

Melanesian analogies, 230-3; al-
leged matriarchal society, 233;
fundamental Polynesian nature
of, 233-4; analogies with Mang-
ateva, 234-6; origins in the Mar-
quesas, 236-8

Orongo village: centre of birdman
cult, 131-3; sailing vessels de-
picted in houses of, 176

Palmer, English traveller, 128

Paper mulberry, 64, 69, 80, 163

Peru, alleged origins of Easter Is.
civilization in, 221-30

Petit-Thouars, Admiral du, 45, 81,
169

Physical beauty, cult of, 109

Poetry, 178-81

Polyandry, 114

Polygamy, 114

Polynesians: migrations of, 34-7,
233-4, 237; stratified social struc-
ture, 166; charm of life in peace-
time, 178; alleged origins of their
civilization in China, 196-7;
regional specialization in the arts,
237

See also Mangareva; Maoris;

Marquesas Islands

Pregnancy, rites observed during,
104

Priesthood, 94~5; and rites at birth,
104, 105

Puberty, 107-8

Punamarengo, cave at, 76

Punapau, Mount, 151

Quechua Indians, 201

247

Rano-kao volcano, 131, 133

Rano-raraku quarry, 152-4, 162

Rapahango, Victoria, 102, r1o-11
172-3, 174

Rats, as food, 66-7

Religion: disappearance of major
gods, 120; survival of minor
gods, familiar spirits and demons,
120-3; three categories of super-
natural beings, 123-4; Tangaroa,
god of the sea, 124-5; Hiro, god
of rain, 125, 128; Makemake,
creator of the universe, 125-7,
130-6; other gods, 125; the god
Hana, 126, 134; offerings to the
gods, 127-8; rites to induce rain-
fall, 128; genealogical chants,
128-30; origin of the gods, 129—
130; cult of the birdman, 130-9;
Vie-Kana, bird-god, 134; the
place of tabus, 139-41; and sor-
cery, 141-3; and ancestor images,
144-8; the great statues as images
of deities, 157-9; sacred dances,
182

Rivet, Professor Paul, 196 .

Roggeveen, Admiral Jacob, first
European discoverer of Easter
Is., 37-9, 61-2, 149, 151, 157

Roussel, Brother Hippolyte, 54-6,
103

Routledge, Katherine Scoresby, 47,
131-2, 155-7, 165, 177, 186-7,
189, 192-3, 197

Rue (Rokunga), the last birdman,

134, 137

Sahlins, Dr Marshall D., 166

--- PAGE 269 ---
248 INDEX

Salmon, Tahitian settler on Easter
Is., 226

Sculpture, wooden; vulgarity of
modern products, 57; the old
and the modern, $1-2; horrific
images of spirits, 121; ancestor
images, 144-8; resemblance to
Melanesian images, 232-4

See also Staraes; Stonemasonry

Sea birds, refuges of, 132

Sex life, 111-15

Shapiro, Dr Harry, 33, 230-1

Social structure: tribal organization,
$3-6; social hierarchy, 86~7;
kings, 87-94; pricsthood, 94-5,
craftsmen, 95-6; warriors, 96;
commoners and slaves, 96-7;
social rclations, 97-9; war, 99-
103; cannibalism, to2-3; ven-
geance and murder, 103

Society Islands, 87, 119

See also Tahiti
Society of Friends of Easter Island,

.

Statues: placing of, 118-19, 156-7;
grandeur and mystery of, 149-51;
the cylinders (‘hats’), 151-2; use
of basalt for, 152; the Rano-
raraku quarry, 132-4; two types
of, 154-5; workmanship, 155-6;

temporary sanctity of, 157-9;
fantastic theories on their origins,
159; typology and chronology,
159-61; volcanic tufa used for,
162, 165; tools used, 162; weight,

transportation,

liths and Cuzco buildings, 223-4;
analogies with the Marquesas, 236
Stolpe, 78
Stone-masonry, 82
Surf-riding, 106
Symbolic figures, making of, 107

‘Tablets: discovery and collection of,
183-4; masterpieces of graphic
art, 184-$; rarity and valuc, 185—
186; knowledge of a prerogative
of class of chanters, 186-8, 195;
question of writing on, 188-9;
tabus surrounding them, 189;
attempts to decipher, 189-93;
alleged connexion with Indus
civilization, 193-6, 199, 202;
alleged connexion with China,
196-7, 199, 202; alleged con-
and Caroline Archipelago, 198-9;
the author's interpretation, 199-
207; alleged connexion with
Peruvian script, 224

Tabus; against theft, 65, 140; im-
posed and removed by kings, 93;
dietary, 109-10; child’s head, 111;

--- PAGE 270 ---
INDEX

corpses, 118; birdman cult, 136-
181; fishing-nets, 139-40; penal-
ties for violation of, 140-1; tabu
symbols, 141; ariki, 175; Tablets,
189

Tahiti: geological origins, 30; word
to denote human image, 159;
the staff as symbol of liturgical
poems, 205

Tabunga (priest, craftsman), 95

Talas-y-Gomez, 31

Tangata-manu (birdman), 133

Tangata-rongorongo (chanters or re-
citers), 186-8

Tangata-taku (medicine men and
sorcerers), 141

Taropa, 113

Tatane (demons), 121

Tattooing, 76-9, 91; of children,
106; legend on origin of, 218-20;
Easter Is. and Marquesan analo-
gies, 236; its highest develop-
ment found in the Marquesas,
237

Te Haha, 186-7, 189

Teao, Carlos, 141-2, 186-7, 189

Tepano, Juan, 79, 81, 87-8, 114,
135-8, 147-8, 170, 177, 185-6,
208, 227-8

Thomson, W. J., 95, 129, 143, 184,
191-2, 194, 225-7

Tiki (buman figures with large
eyes), 236

Timber. See Wood

Tonga archipelago, the Trilith in,
163-4

Torometi, 51-4, 56, 142

249

Tuamotu Islands: chanting of genea-
logies in, 97; the marae (mauso-
leums), 119; the abu (funerary
platforms), 159; the staff as sym-
bol of liturgical poems, 205;
Easter Islanders alleged to origi-
nate from, 226; Polynesian ori-
gins, 237

Tufa, volcanic, used for the great
statues, 162, 165

Tupu, King, 35

Turtles, 70

Tu’u-ko-ihu, Chief, myth of, 144-6

Ure, demon, 123

Vaeiko, Ure, 191-2
Vandesande, Captain, 164
Vengeance, for murder, 103
Viriamo, old woman, 108, 114
Volz, 33

Wagner, K., 231

War, 99-103

Water, scarcity of, 65-6

Williamson & Balfour, 57

Women: and polygamy, 114; and
polyandry, 114; well treated, and
influence of, 114; and domestic
quarrels, 114-15; and division of
labour, 115; and divorce, 115-16;
and adultery, 116

Wood, scarcity of, 70-2, 81, 163,
237

Writing. See Tablets

Zumbohm, Father, 73, 103, 183, 190

--- PAGE 271 ---

--- PAGE 272 ---

--- PAGE 273 ---

--- PAGE 274 ---
*

--- PAGE 275 ---

--- PAGE 276 ---
cat ?rar ARCHAEOLOGICAL LIBRARY,
NEW DELHI

= sue epecengy 3 is

Catalogue No. £01.0997/hat/Pu-ss0s

Author— Bulleck, Michel. Tr.

: Easter Islandza stone’
Hilyeation of the Recertes

