--- PAGE 1 ---
Request Date: 28-APR-2021 
Expiration Date: 03-MAY-2021 
ILL Number: 11111111111111111 
IIIII IIIII IIIII IIIII IIII IIII 
Printed Date: 28-APR-2021 
TGQ or OCLC #: 1111111111111111111111 
IIIII IIIII IIIII IIIII IIIII IIII IIII 
ILL Num~ 
TGQ or OCLC #: 207824385 
\~ 
Call Nun(ber: GN2 .G55~N2 .G55;GN2 .G55;GN2 .G55;GN2 .G55;GN2 .G55;GN3CG~2 
.G55;GN2 .G55;GN2 .G55;GN2 .G55; 
Format: AniclePrinted 
Ext. No: 
Title: Etnologiska studier. ; GOTARC. Series B, 
Gothenburg archaeological theses ; no. 10. 
Serial Title: GOTARC. Series B, Gothenburg 
archaeological theses; no. 10. 
Article Title: Alfred Metraux: Easter Island 
SanctuariesAnalytic and Comparative Study 
Volume/Issue: 5, 5 
Part Pub. Date: 1937 
Pages: 104-153 
Pub. Place: <2012-> : Go?teborg : Go?teborgs 
etnografiska museum 
Borrower: ULA0 
Email: 
Patron Name: 
Patron e-mail: 
Service Level: Priority - Extended Search 
Delivery Method: Empire Library Delivery/UPS/FedEx/USPS 
Request Notes: We prefer ADA (OCR enabled) documents, 
if possible for copies. Please send a 
conditional if no renewal and/or library use 
only. Thank You! FAX/ARIEL:607-777-4848 
EMAIL:mainill@binghamton.edu OCLC Req. 
Ex. Affiliations: Empire Library Delivery, IDS, 
SCRLC, SHARES, SUNY OCLC Req. Ex. 
Source: ILLiad 
Need By: 
Verification Source: <TN: 1051815><0DYSSEY: 128.226. 7 .192/ 
ILL> OCLC 
Supplier Reference: 1111111111111111111111 
IIIII IIIII IIIII IIIII IIIII IIII IIII 
Supplier Reference: ILLNUM:207824385 
Local request number: ILLNUM:207824385 
Owned By: UCLA Young Research Library - ILL 
ISBN/ISSN: 03747530 
SHARES 
Address: Binghamton University Libraries 
Bartle Library-ILL 
4400 Vestal Parkway E./ Library Acquisitions 
LS-G701 
Binghamton, NY 
13902 
Service Type: Copy non returnable 
Max Cost: USD30 
Payment Type: IFM 
Copyright Info: US:US_CCL 
Requester Symbol: OCLC:BNG 
Return To: Interlibrary Loans 
UCLA Young Research Library 
280 Charles E. Young Dr. 
Los Angeles, CA, 
90095-1575 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Easter Island Sanctuaries 
(Analytic and Comparative. Study) 
by 
Dr A. Metraux. 
(Ethnologist on the staff of Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Honolulu, Hawaii.) 
Acknowledgment. 
I wish to express my gratitude to Dr. P. H. 
Buck, Mr. Kenneth Emory, and Dr. Edwin G. 
Burrows 
of Bishop Museum who have aided 
me with their wide experience of Polynesia and 
their criticism. 
I extend my sincere apprecia-
tion to Mrs. E. Christian for her sympathetic 
and constant cooperation. 
Sanctuaries. 
Ahu. 
Ahus' were probably the sanctuaries of the 
Islan-
ders as well as their cemeteries. 
To-day they are regarded 
merely as burial platforms or collective sepulchresi). 
There 
is no definite evidence that ahus were sanctuaries of the 
various lineages or extended families. 
But that 
use is 
indicated by dim recollections of ceremonies held near or on 
ahus, by the position of the monuments as regard ancient 
settlements, 
and by analogy with the rest of Polynesian 
culture. 
The identity of ahus with the maraes of central 
Polynesia is so evident that it was not doubted by early 
travellers. 
One of them, M. DE LANGLE, companion of 
1
) Palmer always uses the word papaku for burial terraces. 
In Roussel's 
dictionary papaku is translated as 
)►corpse». This word, probably distorted 
through 
carelessness and lack of philological sense, is pakeopa in Pinart's 
account and designates the ahu. 
105 
PERousE, understood well the relationship of the ahu to the 
village and the importance it had as an outward indication 
of independent political unity. 
He says (LA PEROUSE, 20, 
vol. I. p.82): 
>>The most probable conjecture concerning the 
government of these islanders is that they compose but a single 
nation divided into as many districts as there are morais; 
for we observed that the villages are built near these ceme-
teries>>. 
Each lineage distinctly remembers an ahu of its own where 
the dead of the group were buried. 
Ahus are the most common monuments on Easter Island, 
and they give to the island its individuality. 
The ahus form almost an uninterrupted line along the coast, 
but they are rare on the headland of Poike -
where they are 
only four 
and absent on the steep cliffs of the southwest 
of the island. 
At Ahu-te-peu the ruins of the ahus are so close. to each 
other that it is sometimes difficult to distinguish the outlines 
· of single monuments. 
At some other places, principally 
around small coves and bays, they are also extremely nume-
rous. 
Thus, around the little bay of La Perouse there are 
no less than seven. The ruins of more than twentythree ahus 
cover the portion of the coast from there to ahu Mahatua, 
a distance of about two miles. Around the cove of Vai-hu 
there are very many ruins of especially large ahus. 
LA 
PER0USE's map (atlas, pl. rn) gives five ahus for the bay of 
Hanga-roa. 
ROUTLEDGE (27, p. 166) estimated the number 
of ahus for the island at 260, of which 20 were inland. The 
list made by LAVACHERY (21, p. 286-287) includes only 183 
ahus, but as it was established more by the names given by 
natives than by a general survey, it is very likely that this 
number is far below the actual 
A great many ahus have been destroyed, the names of 
others forgotten; thu:s an exact estimate of all of them is 
extremely difficult. Most of them are located near the shore. 
Their distance from the sea is variable and depends on the 

--- PAGE 3 ---
ro6 
physical features of the land. 
The general tendency was to 
build these monuments as near as possible to the sea. Even 
without M. DE LA.i.~GLE's observation one might have con-
cluded from the archeological 'remains that the ahus were 
generally located near settlements. 
They are particularly 
numerous around coves and other places which were econo-
mically the most advantageous. 
The headland of Poike, 
which is barren and surrounded by high cliffs, was not very 
hospitable, consequently the ahus there were few. 
The study of ahus constitutes the most important 
and 
complicated 
division of the archeology of Easter Island. 
During our stay on the island, the surveying of ahus was en-
trusted to LAVACHERY, who will publish the results of his 
observations and his· plans in a work devoted entirely to 
archeology. 
In this paper, it is enough to 
a general account of 
their main features. 
Ahus may be classified roughly into 
four types: I, image ahus, which are the largest and most 
elaborate; 2, rectangular ahus or ahtt-avanga; 3, ahu-poepoe 
which differ from the preceding types in having one or both 
ends sloping more or less toward the center or outer extremi-
ty; 4, semi-pyramidal ahus or ahu-paepae, simplest of the four 
types. 
All of the structures, to whatever type they belong, 
have a comtl}.on character: they are all mounds of stones. The 
only differences are in the number of stones piled up, and in 
the degree of care taken in the disposition of the stones. 
The ahus are said to have been decorated with white stones. 
This tradition cannot be checked by direct observation, but it 
is probably correct. We know that the hats of the images 
were weighted down by white-washed stones and the tapu 
signs were1surmounted by boulders painted white ( GONZALEZ, 
17, p. 95). I found a few pieces of drifted coral (karama) on 
some ahus. There is certainly an association between the 
white-washed stones and the coral, and we know that coral 
played an important 
part in some of Jhe religious cere-
· monies. 
Image Ahus. 
The large ahus, with their images, represent masterpieces of 
Easter Island architecture. 
Although the principles followed 
in construction a.re identical with those observed in the smaller 
ahus, the workmanship has reached a rare state of perfection 
in the larger ones. The primitive heap of stones has taken a 
definite shape and has become a real monument. tfilmks to 
the deveopment 
of retaining walls (fig. r). 
The slabs or 
regular blocks of stones carefully fitted which make up 
these walls combined into beatiful, smooth surfaces, behind 
which is the coarse, central heap of rubble. 
The basic struc-
ture is always the same, modified by changes in detail and 
considerable variation in size. 
On the seaward side is a 
perpendicular 
wall with a central salient which may be 
compared to a stage (fig. 2). This salient corresponds to 
the body of the ahu and the two lateral walls to the wings. 
The statues stood on the salient or stage. 
The landward 
part 
of the monuments 
appears somewhat like a solid 
triangle. 
The wings slant down to the ground-level on both 
ends; the center slopes down toward the front (fig. 3 and 4). 
The slab-lined vaults for the dead were sometimes locaiied 
under this stage but more often under the sloping terrace or 
glads. 
Some of the vaults were probably built while the terrace 
was being constructed. 
THOMSON (29, p. 507) noticed at 
Tongariki that >>the oldest of these tombs appear to have been 
sealed up before the structure was completed, and the proba-
bility is that they were not intended to be opened, from the 
fact that there is nothing to indicate their exact locality>>. 
But from many ahus I examined I received the impression 
that some vaults might well have been later additions to the 
structure; that others were part of the original plan and left 
to be accessible as tombs. 
The slanting masonry stops at a low row of slabs. The 
approach to the slope or terrace is sometimes paved with 
big boulders which extend onto the glacis surface (fig. 5). 

--- PAGE 4 ---
108 
This type of construction is not general, and on some ahus 
(Hanga-o-honu and Mahatua) the wings, though lower than 
the stages, do not slant toward the ground. In ahu Hanga-o-
honu and Mahatua, slanting walls at right angles to the wings, 
delimit the structure on both sides of the "glacis (fig. 6). The 
most impressive feature of these· large image ahu~ is the 
retaining face of the seaward wall, on which an amazing 
amount of labor and skill has been expended in 
the 
blocks perfectly. For instance in Ahu-te-peu this wall consists 
of large slabs of lava which are set upright. 
Such slabs, left 
in their natural form, compose two thirds of the wall. The 
spaces between them are filled in with smaller stones chosen 
or cut so that they fit perfectly between the larger stones 
(fig. 7). The upper part of the wall of Ahu-te-peu is made 
of slabs or flat blocks of basalt which, instead of being put on 
edge like the large lower slabs, have been laid horizontally. 
Among the flat slabs may be seen some foundation stones 
taken from old houses. The use of big slabs for building the 
sea front is not common, but it is carried to a rare degree of 
perfection in the ahu Vinapu (fig. 8-9). There the lava is 
dressed into rectangular slabs, fitting one against the other. 
The surfaces have been perfectly smoothed by grinding with 
sand and water. 
The corners of the central portion are 
rounded in elegant curves. 
A gap left between two slabs 
has been patched with a stone cut to fit the space. Behind 
the slabs are piled loose boulders and stones of all sizes. 
More frequently the seaward wall is made of basalt blocks 
of fairly regular square shape. 
Most of the material comes 
from natural qufl,rries. On many parts of the Island the lava 
cooled in regular beds, supplying stones for construction 
which require no further shaping. 
The rectangular blocks 
are laid in regular rows of approximately 
the same size. 
Two unfinished ahus clearly show how the constructions 
were started. 
First the ground was leveled with stones 
and slabs, then the workmen erected the first course of 
the seaward wall by placing large slabs on edge. 
The 
109 
stones dill}inished in size as they neared the coping. Ho-
wever, in the finest ahus, such as ahu Tongariki or ahu 
Hanga-o-honu, 
there is no great difference between the 
lower ~ourses of blocks and the superior ones. 
The top 
of the ahu is from 2 to 4 meters wide and is separated from 
the slope by a little wall generally from 50 cm. to I meter 
high. 
Short descriptions of a few ahus give a better idea of them 
than can any general discussion. 
One of the largest ahus 
on the island is near the bay of 
Perouse (Hanga-o-honu). 
I will describe it from the notes of 
(22, pp. 
The seaward wall, 84 meters long and 5 meters 
high, is made of rectangular blocks of stone. 
The salient, 
30 meters long and 4 meters wide, forms the' stage on 
which the statues stood (fig. 12). 
The stage or statue 
·platform rises above three steps, which according to ~AVA-
CHERY's estimate, are each I meter wide and r.50 meters 
high. 
The middle step contains the burial vaults. 
The 
slope of the wings, on both sides of the salient forms a con-
tim.ious surface with the back part of the stage. 
The ahu 
is delimited on each side by a wall 30 meters long which 
slopes downward until it reaches the ground; 
The sur-
face between the two parallel walls is paved with flat 
stones. 
On the platform once stood six statues, mounted 
on large flat slabs. 
These statues were surmounted by the 
red stone hats which are to be seen lying among the ruins. 
-The ahu Ohan present$ a seaward face made of large 
rectangular slabs which are finely wrought and perfectly 
fitted (fig. 14). This central portion protrudes a distance of 3 
meters from the wings and is ro meters long and 2.30 meters 
high. The wings are of unequal length, one being r6 meters 
long and the other 25.50 meters. 
The greatest width of 
the ahu measured from the center of the salient down the 
slope is 7 meters; the wings converge to a point (fig. r5). The 
front or landward face of the ahu has the rough appearance 
of a solid triangle. 
So close to Ohau as almost to form a 

--- PAGE 5 ---
IIO 
single mass with it is another ahu, 12 meters long and only 
I. 20 meters high in the salient. 
Three steps of unequal 
width lead up to the seaward face (fig. 16). 
SKOTTSBERG 
an excellent description 
of -ahu Te 
Pito-te-kura neat La Perouse Bay. 
A close examii:tation of 
its ruins convinced me of the accuracy of SKoTTSBERG's 
description (28, vol. r, p. 9): 
>>The central part is 23.5 m long and protrudes 4 m. in 
front of the wings; as it stands on somewhat higher ground, it 
rises above the wings in spite of the fronf wall being rather 
low or about 1.25 m. 
The front wall has a foundation of 
small stones and flat slabs, followed by large, well wrought 
blocks; one of these was 2.3 m. long, 0.9 high, and 0.45 
broad, another 2.45 long and, I m. high. 
They are close-
ly fitted. 
The space behind this wall was filled with bould-
ers, the surface paved with larger, flat stones, making a: 
level platform. 
The wings are larger than 'the centre, the east 31. 2 the 
west 32 m. giving as total length of the ahu 86. 7 m. Their 
front wall is as high as or even higher (about 2 m.) than that 
of the centre and is similar in construction, without being so 
neatly finished. 
The . central part of the ahu, behind the 
platform, had been disturbed, a stone wall of 7.6 m stretching 
obliquely along the fallen images. 
The ahu slopes gently 
inwards. 
This slope, which could be traced inland about 
12 m. (measured from the front wall), is divided by a wall 
(not visible above the surface), 3:s described and figured by 
Mrs. ROUTLEDGE. The seaward p.art has a surface of bould-
ers almost free from vegetation, while behind the dividing-
line it looks like an old pavement ~ith grass between the 
stones. 
According to Mrs. ROUTLEDGE, the vaults 
for 
bones are found in this part. In the case in question an open 
vault was to be seen in the seaward part of the west wing; 
it measured r.9 X 0.7 nf with a depth of I m. 
Two slabs 
had covered it. 
We do not know if the ahus were bl!ilt 
with many vaults, or if accomodations for the bones of the 
III 
deceased were arranged on each occasion. 
In the centre of 
the front platform 
one large statue 
or moai had stood 
(plate 4). 
It had been brought down by undermining the 
foundation stone)}. 
The ahu statue ·so minutely described by SKOTTSBERG 
is 
called Paro and is said to have been one of the last erected 
on the island. 
According to my informant the statue of 
this ahu was• the last one to be pulled down. 
The q.estruc-
tion probably took place about 1840. 
Image ahti.s seem to have impressed neither RoGGEVEEN nor 
GONZALES, 
for they do not mention them. GONZALEZ 
or some 
of his lieutenants must have seen ahu Hanga-o-honu or ahu 
Mahatua on their way to the heights of Poike, where they 
set up their three· crosses. Even .these enormous platforms 
were apparently not judged to be worthy of mention. 
The first descriptions of ahus ar~ found in CooK' s and 
G. FORSTER'S accounts. 
They described the ahu of the bay 
of Hanga-roa, which, being near the village, has suffered 
most fron;i the destructiveness of both natives and Chileans. 
Ahu Hanga-roa, 
nearest the landing place, has been des-
troyed by Chilean authorities to make the present pier. 
From the material forming the structure of this jetty, one 
may see that the ahu was of good workmanship; it is prob-
ably the one CooK (8, p. 294) has in mind when he speaks 
of the splendid masonry of these monuments. 
CooK' s 
description, ptedse in detail, does not give a clear idea of 
the general structure of the ahus: 
"On the cont~ary they (the ahus) are burying-places for 
certain tribes or families. 
I, as well as some others, saw a 
human skeleto;n, lying in one of these platforms, just covered 
with stones. 
Some of these platforms of masonry are 30 
or 40 feet long, 12 or r6 broad, and from 3 to 12 in height; 
which last in some measure depends on the nature of the 
ground. 
For they are generally at the brink of the bank 
facing the sea, so that this face may be IO or 12 feet or more 
high, and the other may not be above 3 or 4. They are 

--- PAGE 6 ---
II2 
built, or rather faced, with hewn stones of a very large 
size; and the workmanship is not inferior to the best plain 
piece of masonry we have in Eng!and. 
They use no sort of 
ce1nent: yet the joints are exceedingly dose, and the stones 
moticed and tenanted 
one into another, 
in very artfu11 
manner. 
The side walls are not perpendicular, but inclining 
a little inwards, in the same manner that breast work, etc. 
are built in Europe: yet had not all this care, pains and 
sagacity, been able to preserve these curious structures from 
the ravages of all-devouring Time." 
G. FoRSTER's description (r5, vol. r, pp. 566-567) of an 
ahu removes any doubt that the monument he examined 
was ahu Hanga-roa, which was destroyed to make the jetty. 
Fragments of statues are still seen among the ruins. 
"About 15 yards from the landing place we saw a perpendi-
cular wall of square hewn stones, about I and a half or 2 
feet long, and I foot broad. 
Its greatest height was about 7 
or 8 feet, but it gradually sloped on both sides, and its length 
might be about 20 yards. 
A remarkable circumstance was 
the junction of these stones, which were laid after the most 
excellent rules of art, sitting in such a manner as to make a 
durable piece of architecture. 
The stone itself of which 
they 
are cut is not of great har,dness, being a blackish 
cavernous and brittle stony lava. 
The ground rose from 
the water side upwards; so that another wall, parallel to the 
first, about 
12 yards from it and facing the country, was 
not above 2 or 3 feet high. The whole area between the two 
walls was filled up with soil and, covered with grass. About 
50 yards farther to the south there was another elevated 
area, of which the surface· was paved with square stones 
exactly similar to those which formed the walls. 
In the 
midst of this area, there was a pillar consisting of a single 
stone, which represented a human figure to the waist. .. " 
BERNIZE'.l', geographical engineer of the LAPEROUSE expe-
dition (21, vol. 2, pp. 257-258), gives the most complete and 
clear description of an ahu, .made when the old culture was 
II3 
still functioning. 
His description is illustrated by a plan, a 
cross-section, and a schematic view of the ahu. 
''The cemeteries or morai are of more remarkable con-
struction; and though their dimensions are very various, 
they are constantly of the same undeviating form. 
On an 
inclined plane, like that of the soil, is erected a sloping 
wall A built with the hewn stones before described. 
The 
height of the wall is proportioned to the declivity of the 
ground; and on its summit is fixed a horizontal platform B, 
made of rough stones, on which are placed horizontally, and 
let into the former, rectangular pieces of hard stone C, as a 
base for supporting several almost shapeless masses D, re-
sembling busts. 
To these figures are added, as may be seen 
in the plate, crowns or capitals E, perfectly cylindrical, 
and a little concave in the under part, to admit the head. 
This is of red lava, extremely light and porous. 
Two 
steps F, below the platform, made in the same manner, 
and covered with the same stone, lead by a gentle descent, 
to an esplanade, bounded by a kind of parapet, apparently 
made of the earth which had been dug up to level the ground. 
There are also some 
on the upper part of which is a 
plinth, running along the whole length, on which are rudely 
represented the figures of recumbent skeletons. 
Near the 
lower step, towards the esplanade, are entrances or narrow 
trenches, leading to a subterraneous 
cavern, in which are 
great quantities of human bones. 
Of this cavern the form 
is very irregular, and its size by no means depends even on 
that of the morai. 
Height of the wall: 8 f. 
Length of the platform: 80 f. 
Breadth of ditto: 12 f. Height of the steps: 2 f. Breadth of 
ditto: 3 f. Length of the esplanade: \384 f. Breadth of ditto: 
324 f.". 
The figures listed by BERNIZET do not correspond with those 
given by CooK and LA PEROUSE, but it is likely that he has 
chosen for its description ahu Hanga-roa which seems to 
have been the most conspicuous in the region of Hanga-roa. 
8 

--- PAGE 7 ---
II4 
The principal features of the image ahu may be summari-
zed as follows: a platform of loose stones perpendicular on 
the sea side, and sloping on the. inland side. 
The central 
portion forms a salient and. the wings often slant. 
Open 
spaces in the structure were utilized as burial vaults. 
The condition of the big ahu is not due entirely to the 
vandalism of the Chileans and natives. 
Their decay was 
noticed by CooK. 'Probably no care was taken of the ahu 
because it belonged to a family w~ich had died out; and 
intertribal 
wars may have contributed not a little to the 
destruction of the monuments. 
/ 
Semi-pyramidal 
Ahus~ 
Ahus of the type that ROUTLEDGE (27, p. 172) called semi-
pyramidal are numerous throughout the islan
1d, · and I believe 
that her estimate of 60 structures is quite . oelow the correct 
figure. 
The ahus are of an extremely $imple construction, 
being nothing more than a large cairn of semi-pyramidal 
shape (fig. 17). Vaults were left in the interior of such cairns. 
The form of the structure, although rough, does not differ in 
principle from that of the large image ahus. 
The seaward 
side is more or less perpendicular and tke apex of this halved 
pyramid corresponds to the central portion of the ordinary 
ahus. 
The two sides are not unlike the wings of Ahu-te-peu 
just described, and the slope behind presents the same geo-
metrical appearance. Near Ahu-te-peu is ahu·Atu-o-puna the 
vault of which is 2.50 meters long, 60 cm. wide, and r.20 me-
ters deep. 
Sometimes such ahus are either surmounted by 
fragments of old statues or by stones placed like the statues, 
but such ornaments are exceptional and most of these cairns 
are entirely plain. 
The largest of the semi-pyramidal ahus are from ro to 15 
meters long and their maximum height may reach 3 meters. It 
is almost certain that several of these ahus are of more recent 
date than the large ones surmounted by images; many of the 
siµiple cairns have been erected on the sites of image ahus 
with material taken from the ruins of the latter. 
Some of the 
more elaborate aims have been rebuilt in the form of simple 
cairns. 
Good examples of these rebuilt and superimposed 
structures 
are ahus Mahatua and Maitaki-te-moa 
(fig. 6). 
However, there is not a single proof that these semi-pyrami-
dal ahus · are of a type posterior to the others or that they 
were all built in recent times. 
Their form might as well be 
considered primitive and the prototype of the big ahus. Being 
simpler and more easily made, they might have been main• 
tained by poor families and resorted to when the decadent 
natives were no longer capable of building more elaborate 
sanctuaries. 
. Abu Poepoe. 
Easter Islanders give the name of ahu-poepoe (ahu-boat) to 
a type of structure 
which differs widely from the two de-
scribed above. They represent no small accomplishment in the 
art of adjusting sJones. The word for boat has been given to 
these structures because of their elongated form. 
Their re-
semblance to a boat is enhanced by the curved, raised ends 
which suggest the bow and stern of a ship. 
Rows of stones 
along the. upper edge were probably placed there to imitate 
gunwales. 
As these ahus are few (about 12 in all) we did not 
open them to examine their interior construction. 
Studying 
them would have obliged us to destroy beautiful monuments. 
ROUTLEDGE 
has given an excellent plan of the ahu-poepoe which 
she studied in all its details. It was about 60 meters long and 
7 meters wide and its two raised extremeties were from 3 to 
5 meters high (fig. 19). It contained two burial vaults just 
beneath the· surface. 
Near one of _the skeletons were glass 
beads, an important discovery since it shows that ahus of this 
type were still being made after contact with Europeans at 
the end. of the eigthteenth century or in the beginning of the 
nineteenth century. 
Tradition has it that a man, expert in 
the construction of ahu-poepoe, was among the people kid-
napped by the. Peruvians in 1862. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
• 
n6 
Closely related to the ahu-poepoe is a variety of ahus equally 
elongated but with straight instead of curved ends. The nar-
row and high end of such an ahu is toward the sea; the upper 
surface slopes gently from the high end. These ahus are 
especially numerous on the north coast, in the region of 
Hango-teo: 
One of them, between Hango-te~ and Puna-
marengo, is surmounted by a low stone pillar. 
ROUTLEDGE 
calls this second class of ahu-poepoe,. >>wedge-shaped>> 
ahus, 
since their form suggests a giant wedge. There are six of 
them on the island. 
Rectangular Ahus. I 
ROUTLEDGE has failed to include in her classification -of 
ahus a type which, though not very common, exists in several 
places on the north coast. Such ahus may be-described as 
rectangular heaps of stones with burial vaults in the interior. 
They may reach large proportions, and they ;differ from the 
second variety of the ahupoepoe only in flat upper surface 
which contrasts to the sloping ones of ahu poepoe. 
An ahu 
situated behind Ahu-te-pito-kura is a good specimen of this 
type of monument. 
As far as I know, nobody has described such. burial struc-
tures; therefore it seems advisable to discuss at least one in 
detail. 
For this purpose, I have chosen the ahu Avanga-
vai-purotu near Vai-tara-kai-uva 
(fig. 
. This cairn is si-
tuated on the top of a cliff near the sea. It is made of large 
boulders 
and from afar it greatly ressembles a hare-moa 
(hen-house). 
It is almost rectangular, 
although the four 
corners are slightly rounded. 
Its sides are 6 meters long, 
2.80 meters wide; its height is 1.30, meters. The center of 
the heap of stones is hollow, forming a big vault 3 meters long, 
6o cm. wide, and 65 cm. deep (see plan 23). The sides are 
not perpendicular, but are made up of rows of stones which 
gradually project toward the top. 
In the vault were three 
skeletons. On the seaward side of the ahu, stones were placed · 
on the ground in crescentic form. Another structure of the 
same type, but in poorer condition, is to be seen, under the 
hill of Vai-tara-kai-uva. 
Its vault is larger and deeper, and 
it is possible to stand upright insida. Long slabs close the 
entrance at the top. 
Religious Structures. 
Comparative Study. 
The burial platforms (ahus) of Easter Island have numerous 
affinities with analogous structures in Mangareva, the Tuamo-
tus, Tahiti, and 1i'ecker Island in the Hawaiian group. 
This 
fact is of primary importance for a clear understanding of the 
origin of Easter Island. 
The comparisons between Easter Is-
land ruins, and those of the rest of Polynesia will be facilitated 
if one remembers that the ~--'-"""'"c..c-.::.:c_Island 
ahus are essentially 
stone platforms. 
The paved slope of some may be conceived 
,,,as a sort of court, but in general the space in front of the ahu 
is not defined by any enclosures or pavement. In eastern and 
central Polynesia, the sacred stone platforms are always as-
sociated with'·a court which is either a terrace, a platform or a 
walled enclosure (BURROWS, ms.). The word marae generally 
used in this area for a religious structure is not found in the 
Easter Island dialect. 
The stone platforms of Easter Island are always termed ahu,. 
a word which also means >>to swell>>, >>a protuberance>>, >>a 
heap>>. In the Tuamotus the word ahu is restricted to the 
raised stone platform at one end of the marae, and in Tahiti 
the term ahu or tu-ahu has the same significance. 
In New 
Zealand, a tu-ahu is a sacred open place with an erect post> 
stone, or row of stones at one end (BEST, 4. vol.I, p.288). On 
Nukuhiva and Uapou in the Marquesas, natives called ahu 
the religious structure which in the other islands of the group 
is called me' ae. In the Hawaiian islands, the word ku-ahu 
designates an altar or a stone platform at a sacred place. 
The word tahua which on Easter Island applies to the 
paving in front of an ahu is the equivalent of the Marquesan 
tohua which designates the tribal assembly place at which 

--- PAGE 9 ---
II8 
feasts were given and certain classes of ceremonies.performed. 
In New Zealand the word tahua (courtyard) is a synonym of 
marae. 
In the Tuamotus and Society islands, tohua is the 
term for the level ground of the marae. 
The modern .meaning 
of tohua is floor. It cannot be asserted that the tahua of the 
Easter Island ahu was the assembly place, though this is 
probable. 
LINTON (23, p. 53) thinks that in southeastern 
Polynesia tohua is the ancient term for assembly place. The 
fact that this word was used on Easter=Isiand 
makes his 
hypothesis logical. 
The term marae designates a sacred place in the Tuamotus, 
the Cook Islands, the Austral Islands, Rapa, and Mangareva. 
In New Zealand it applies to the villa~ green and has nothing 
to do with the tu-ahu. The word malae h~s the same meaning 
in Samoa, Tonga, Futuna, Uvea, and Pukapuka (BURROWS, 6). 
LINTON (23, p.50), EMORY {rr; p-4<>),_ 
~nd BURROWS (ms.) have 
all come to the conclusion that the ;narae, as a religious struc-
ture, resu}ted from the combination of the platform (ahu) 
with · the assembly court which as$umed a sacred character. 
This fusion of the two .elements occurred in central or margi-
nal Polynesia after the Easter Islanders separated from the 
other Polynesian groups. Hence th'e 
Island sanctuary 
remained a platform without a defined court and. was called 
ahu and not marae. 
The following comparative survey will show the similarities 
and the differences betyveen,. the .Easter Island religious struc-
tures and those of the 
of Polynesia. 
Most of the maraes · of Mangareva have been practically 
obliterated since the advent of the missionaries, but a few 011 
the low island of Temoe ar_e almost intact. 
The archeological 
remains of Temoe have been des .. cribed in detail by EMORY (14, 
ms., Bishop Mus.), who is convin.eed that the stone structures 
of that island offer no significant diffe~ences from those 
of Mangareva pr9per. 
The Mangarevan marae, as describ-
ed by EMORY, was a rectangular platform placed across one 
end of an unenclosed court. 
The court face of the platform 
ng 
had one or two steps. The largest maraes, at least had burial 
vaults in the platforms. 
The steps on the court face of the 
raised platform and the presence of burial vaults in the plat-
form connect Mangarevan maraes with Easter Island ahus 
more closely than with other stone structures in Polynesia. 
Small, unstepped, 
rectangular 
platforms on Temoe are 
comparable to the rectangular 
ahus of Easter Island, and 
the burial cairns are probably related to the simple, pyrami-
dal ahus. 
However, the analogies are more striking in the 
large, stepped maraes. 
· 
The Marquesas had two kinds of marae (in the Marquesan 
dialect me' ae): public maraes for ceremonies and mortuary 
maraes (LINTON, 23, pp. 32-40). 
Only mortuary maraes are 
discussed here. In the Marquesas, they did not serve as burial 
places, as did those of Easter Island and Mangareva, but were 
sites where the dead were exposed and where deified ances-
tors, chiefs, or priests, were worshiped. 
After a sojourn on the 
marae the bones were taken to caves, barren hilltops, or trees. 
The Marquesan maraes show such a diversity in their struc-
ture that their main characteristics cannot be easily defined. 
They are generally platforms, terraces, or terraced platform 5, 
but these are modeled on the lines of the paepae (house plat-
form) of the ordinary dwellings. The upper terrace was occu-
pied by a sacred house. The plan and general appearance of 
these structures varied in different islands of the group, and 
some of the maraes consisted of several platforms, irregularly 
arranged either upon a large terrace or at ground level. 
tirely foreign to Easter Island are the wide platforms and their 
disposition in series of superposed platforms or terraces, the 
presence of ~ .... ,_ ... 
~ ... ...., 
... or skull pits, and the sacred houses. On 
the other hand, the large wooden or stone images which were 
set upon the platforms or terraces establish a general link with 
Easter 
Island ahus and Marquesan mortuary maraes. 
On 
the marae of Hivaoa, >>The images of wood or stone, variable 
in number, were usually set up at the rear of the next to 
highest terrace>> (LINTON, 23, p. 38). The Marquesan ahu de-

--- PAGE 10 ---
I20 
parts rather widely from the Easter Island ahu, except for 
the general principle of a platform, the sameness of name, 
and the presence. of statues on the platforms. 
The resemblance between the ahus of Easter Island and 
the marae of the eastern Tuamotus is great (EMORY, 12, p. 22). 
They have the same plan, but on Easter Island the court is 
not as clearly defined as in the Tuamotus. 
The fundamen-
tal elements of the Tuamotuan 
sanctuaries are a platform 
and a rectangular 
court. 
The platform ranges from ro to 
So feet in length, 2 to IO feet in width, and I to 5 feet in 
height. 
Along its rear edge is planted a row of upright slabs 
which occupy exactly the same position as the 
Island 
statues. 
These uprights marked the place of the gods on the 
marae and served either as backrest seats or as memorials. 
Some of the Tuamotuan slabs are shaped roughly in human 
form. The dead were not buried in the platform, though the 
ahu was connected with the cult of deified ancestors whose 
relics were kept in sacred reecptacles or ex1pm;ea on the ma-
rae during ceremonies. 
The maraes of the eastern Tuamotus 
are closely related to those of the western Tuamotus and to 
the inland maraes of the Society Islands. 
All types of maraes in the Society Islands seem to be de-
rived from the inland marae (EMORY, II, pp. 38-40). 
The 
inland marae consists of a low rectangular platform (ahu) at 
one end of a rectangular court. 
In the earliest maraes this 
court was not enclosed. 
Either one or three upright stones 
stand on the rear of the ahu, and three uprights against the 
face of the ahu mark the honorary positions of gods or of 
their living rer)re!SeTilta1t1v◄es Later, in the windward islands, 
the court was enclosed by a stone wall. The height of the 
marae was increased and supplementary platforms imposed 
on it. There is thus a basic similarity in plan ·between the 
maraes of the Society Islands and those of the eastern Tua-
motus. 
The Easter Island and Tuamotuan form must be of 
great antiquity 
in Polynesia, because it appears in the ar-
chaic marae of uninhabited Necker Island, northwest of the 
121 
mam Hawaiian group, and in prehistoric ruins on Sydney 
Island in the Phoenix group. Those on Necker Island have a 
rectangular platform which faces a paved rectangular terrace. 
Upright slabs are set up along the rear of the platform, op-
posite the central upright. 
Other uprights are planted at 
several 
on the terraces (EMORY, ro, pp. 60-7r). 
The 
similarity of thjs type· of marae with the ahu of the eastern 
Tuamotus 
and · the inland marae of the Society Islands is 
unquestionable. 
Undoubtedly this is the original 
from 
which the Easter Island ahu developed . 
. Tongarevan marales are essentially formed by a rectangu-
lar court delineated by curbstones and upright slabs. 
Four 
of the remaining ma-:qies have the raised platform at one end 
of the court, but in~ many maraes the platform has disap-
peared, perhaps during post-European times. The platform is 
m~e of. limestone slabs set on an outer wall, and the space 
between is filled with coral boulders. 
The slabs behind the 
I 
platform are always :the tallest. 
Even in the maraes without 
platforms there is always an end with high uprights {HIROA, 
rg, pp. 148-159). 
The aberrant characteristic 
of Tongare-
van maraes is the court defined by curbs and surrounded by 
slabs. This feature connects the Tongarevan marae with the 
Cook Islands and Austral Islands maraes, which are simple, 
rectangular 
enclosures without 
platforms. 
Sometimes up-
rights which serve 'as backrests are associated with these ma-
raes. 
On Raivavae the marae enclosed by spaced upright 
slabs is bordered by curbs. 
This strongly recalls the Tonga-
revan structures without the raised platform. 
The images 
were placed at points around the enclosure and at the ap-
proach of the court. 
Mr. STOKES informs me that there is a 
tradition on Raivavae tliat the first maraes were stone heaps 
which have been entirely destroyed. 
The only religious 
structure left on the island of Ral)a is a platform in the mid-
dle of two courts. 
The structure of the old Hawaiian heiau is difficult to de-
fine. 
Like the l\farquesan maraes, with which the heiaus 

--- PAGE 11 ---
122 
have many points in common, their plan and disposition va-
ried considerably. 
It is said that before the coming of Paao 
from ·Tahiti in the thirteenth century, there were open plat-
forms which did not differ in form and function from the en-
closed heiau. 
Open-platform heiaus were built until Euro-
pean times (THRUM, 30). 
A marae on the island of Hawaii is like the Necker Island 
marae. 
No doubt this form of marae existed throughout the 
Hawaiian islands. Simple platform maraes without uprights 
are seen on all the islands. 
The arrangement 
of carved 
wooden slabs on one heiau on Kauai is figured by Cook. 
It is similar to 'that of the stone uprights on the Necker 
Island marae and 
a· basic relationship. 
Conclusion.· 
When the Easter Islanders emigrated from Eastern Poly-
nesia they had already developed the ahu -
a platform fa-
ced with slabs 
but this structure had not yet become as-
sociated with a court (marae). The independence of the ahu 
has been preserved in New Zealand. 
On Easter Island the 
inland face, which is stepped in l\!Iangareva and in the Society 
Islands, became a sloping surface. 
One step, rarely two, was 
retained. 
The originality of the Easter Island ahu lies in the 
two slanting wings which are found nowhere else in Polynesia. 
Cut Stones. 
Cut stones , were used extensively 
on Easter 
Island. 
Dressed slabs or blocks are found on most of the big ahus 
and appear in structures 
such as wells and underground 
houses of Orongo. Worked curbs, taken from the foundations 
of thatched huts, were often incorporated into the facings of 
ahus and· wells. 
Apart from Easter Island, there are only three regions m 
Polynesia where stone cutting was well developed 
the Mar-
quesas, the Society Islands, and Tonga. 
In Tonga, where 
stone cutting reached a high development, the material em-
·123, 
ployed was easily worked limestone (MCKERN, 24, p. 5). In 
the Marquesas cutters worked coarse grained tuff (LINTON, 
23, p. 8). Limestones or tuff blocks were preferred in the 
Society Islands, though sometimes the carvers used basalt 
(EMORY, II, 
2, p. 5). The excellence and the individuality 
of Easter Island stone work lie in the use of hard, vesicular 
basalt. 
Though cut stones were perhaps not so common on 
Easter Island as in the Marquesas, they evidence a more ela-
borate technique. 
Cut stones have been reported from many Polynesian is-
lands, but a distribution based on the presence of a few spe-
cimens found on an island is· misleading. 
It -is absurd to 
group together, on a distribution map, islands on which a 
few ex,nnpn::s of cut stones are found with islands on w1'ch 
cut stone was 'Widely used. For instance,'New Zealand is not 
to be classed with the Tuamotus or the Marquesas. 
Stone 
cutting in New Zealand is limited to a few J.J.H.,a.j;;.~~;:, 
and to the -
crude carvings in the tuff deposits near Lake Rotorua. (Co-
WAN, 9, pp. 134-139). 
The dressed curbs of a Fanning Island enclosure have 
L-shaped corners made in one piece. These are regarded by 
LINTON (23, p. 18) as good evidence of the late introduction 
of sto~e cutting in Polynesia. A similar technique was wide-
ly used in Tonga. For this reason Linton believes that the 
same wave of immigrants were responsible for this particular 
adjustment of stones in both regions. 
As a matter of fact, 
Fanning was settled by Tongan immigrants (EMORY, 13, pp. 
14-17) 
and the presence of identical techniques in both 
places is natural. 
The slabs which form the famous structures of Malden Is-
land are not dressed. 
They are natural slabs, broken on the 
spot, and utilized afterwards in the construction. 
There is 
some affinity in the aspect and disposition of the Malden Is-
land ruins and those of Raivavae (EMORY, 13, pp. 37-41). 
Red tuff curbs border the outside of enclosures of the best 
structures of R~ivavae. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
124 
Stone cutting was of little importance in the Cook Islands, 
though a few slabs which might have been shaped and a few 
worked stone blocks have been found there. 
The upright 
slabs bUrrounding the Tongarevan maraes were trimmed on 
the edges. Often the tops were shaped to form flanges or 
notches, like those of some upright slabs on Tuamotuan ma-
raes. 
Few cut stones have been discovered in the Mangarev:a Is-
lands, but they were noticed by early voyagers as forming 
low walls or benches along the houses of chiefs (BEE CHEY, 2, 
vol. I, pp. T'7'.[---Ht1.l 
In Hawaii cut stones are exceedingly rare, but the few 
examples left can be compared with those of the Society Is-
lands. 
LINTON (23, p. 18) seems to attach much importance 
to the absence in the Marquesas of any structures which show 
a transition from the use of uncut to cut stones. 
However, 
he says that cut and uncut stones were used together in many 
structures. 
The fact that he adds that they do not alternate 
seems to me irrelevant. 
The main point is that cut stones 
belong to the same chronological period as the rough mate-
rial. 
No influence of foreign migration manifests itself in 
the plan or style of the structures. 
Now here has LINTON 
found the evidence that an age in which only ·rough material 
was used was followed by a period characterized by the ap-
pearance of cut stones in masonry. 
In the' Marquesas, as 
elsewhere in Polynesia, the dressing of slabs or curbs was a 
matter of individual initiative. 
If the cut stones of Polynesia 
were of a highly specialized type, the hypothesis of foreign 
contacts might be acceptable; 
but, as a tu.le,. the dressed 
slabs only exhibit the trimming of edges and occasionally 
the smoothing of faces. 
This is a simple -and rudimentary 
technique which might have been invented or applied lo-
cally without the intervention of new migratory waves. The 
stimulus for the cutting of stones was the desire to improve 
upon the slabs so abundantly provided by nature in most Po-
lynesian islands. 
The lava dikes, the tuff deposits, or the 
125 
limestone strata, found on the surface of the ground, were 
ready ·to be quarried 
and broken into rectangular slabs. 
They could not fail to appeal to the natives as suitable ma-
terial for their structures. 
On Easter Island, as on other Po-
lynesian islands, cut stones were associated with the most 
elaborate and luxurious monuments. 
LINTON (23. p. rg) is well aware that contradictory argu-
ments can be presented in favor of the independent develop-
ment of stone cutting in Polynesia. 
He points out that in 
the Society Islands, as well as on Easter Island, types of 
stone work exist which have no parallel elsewhere. How-
ever, the use of slabs set on edge to form the retaining wall of 
a platform or of a terrace could have spread together with 
the ahu or sacred stone platforms. 
Conclusion. 
This rapid survey of the art of stone cutting in Polynesia 
fails to show the existence of two periods in the history of 
Polynesia. 
We cannot assume that the first settlers of Po-
h,1',.oc,r,:i 
11 islands started to build structures with rough stones 
and then became acquainted with a superior technique through 
new waves of immigrants. 
Stone cutting seems to have de-
veloped locally under differing circumstances. 
The suitabi-
lity of available material is one of the predominant factors 
in the development of stone cutting throughout 
Polynesia. 
Once acquainted with the art of dressing soft stones, the ex-
perts were tempted to resort to harder material. 
In many 
regions, Hawaii for instance, stones were rarely cut, but the 
few exceptions are good evidence that the use of cut stones 
was a matter of local custom. 
Fitted Masonry. 
The facings of a few Easter Island ahus are among the most 
perfect masonry work in Polynesia. 
The slabs or blocks have 
not only been smoothed to evenness, but also they have been 
dressed or selected so as to fit exactly one with another. 
The 
masterpiece of Easter Island stone work is the ahu Vinapu. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
126 
The seaward wall is made of two rows of marvelously smooth 
slabs whose edges join with mathematical accuracy (fig. 8). 
A hole in the face has been patched ·with a stone carved to 
/, 
. 
.. 
. 
fit perfectly,,/ Such a facing resembles the famous walls 
of the Inca palaces of Cuzco. Historical connections have 
been proposed to account for this similarity. 
Before such a 
hypothesis was advanced, it should have been remembered 
that ahu Vinapu is unique nn Easter Island --
not at all 
characteristic of the ordinary stone work of the island. 
It is 
the expression of an extraordinary achievement carrying to 
the height of perfection a few simple techniques, applied with 
less skill in the other monuments. 
Between the Easter Is-
land monuments and the great buildings of Peru the simila-
rity does not go beyond the exact fitting of the stones. 
plan and the structure of the Inca ruins are entirely diffe-
rent. 
In Peru the walls are of carved stone blocks, whereas 
in Easter Island the_y are slabs put on edge which conceal a 
.z:;---------
-•-------
heap of rub bl~.·_. The only conspicuous architectural achieve-
ment of the Easter Islanders has been to seleet and to dress 
the corners of some slabs so that no gaps would appear on the 
surface and impair the aspect of the structure. To accomplish 
this it was not necessary to cross the Pacific in frail canoes. 
The fitting of the angles in Peruvian structures is more com-
plex than in those of Easter Island, where such fitting is ex-
ceptional and limited to a few stones in a few ahus. Hence, 
the analogy is superficial. 
There is neither geographical !}.Q!...__-
chronological link between the two cultures;/'f he wond~rful 
stone constructions of the Peruvians lie in the valleys of inner 
Peru or on the highland of Bolivia, and are separated from 
the sea by mountains and hundreds of miles of land. 
The 
a~ of the Inca ruins is unknown, but many of them, especi-
ally in Tiahttanaco, must be extremely ancient and certainly 
anterior to the Quichua dynasties. 
If there had been a his-
torical· connection between Easter Island and the interior of 
Peru, surely would there not have been more evidence of the 
contact than a simple and obvious device of masonry? 
r 
127 
Exact joining of masonry exi;;ted in other parts of Poly-
nesia. 
On the island of Meeti~, near Tahiti, EMORY (rr, 
p. u8) found in the facing of a marae several curbs with right 
angled jogs cut in an upper corner to receive the end of a stone 
in the course above. 
The same technique has been used in 
the construction of an irrigation ditch on the island of Kauai 
(Hawaiian islands). 
Some blocks used in the ditch have a 
shoulder to make the~ 
fit exactly with adjacent blocks 
(BENNETT, 3, pp. n:>5-106). Dressed stones from some ancient 
ruins may be seen scattered in the village of Kailua on the 
island of Hawaii. 
These stones have cut jogs or shoulders 
(EMORY, II, p. 47). But such examples of worked stones are 
extremely rare in Hawaii. 
This technique is too exceptional on any Polynesian island 
to be considered as a special culture trait scattered by mig-
rations. 
It must have developed locally and have been re-
sorted to by patient stone cutters. who wished to enhance 
the smoothness and the solidity of a facing. The cutting of 
comers was often necessitated by variations in size of the 
slabs. In the Kauai ditch the jointing has no other purpose 
than to keep the top of the wall at a·level. Expert stone cut-
ters might well have solved this little problem without out-
side influence. 
The Easter Island retaining or facing walls, made of verti-
cal slabs planted on end and capped· with horizontally laid 
slabs, have a close affinity with several maraes in the leeward 
Society Islands. 
There the facings of platforms consist of 
huge vertical: slabs on which, in a few places, are laid courses 
of horizontal slabs. A heiau on the island of Niihau in the 
Hawaiian •group presents the same structure, but this work 
>>though assuredly present, is weakly represented in Hawaii>> 
(EMORY, IO, p. 46). 
The facing of large Mangarevan maraes consists of a first 
course of slabs standing on edge and of upper courses of slabs 
lying horizontally. 
Photographs of these structures show a 
close resemblance to Easter Island ahus. This type of stone 

--- PAGE 14 ---
128 
work was known in the Tuamotus. 
The same principle was 
formerly applied in Tongarevan construction, as shown in a 
sketch of a marae wall (BUCK, r8, fig. 40, b). In the Mar-
quesas the tops of many slab walls are finished with one or 
more courses of waterworn boulders (LINTON, 23, p. r2). This 
form of construction is clearly related to that under discussion. 
On Tonga the royal burial mounds were faced with large 
megalithic slabs which can be compared to those of Easter 
Island, but the topping of horizontal slabs is lacking. 
This 
stone work could have been introduced from Fiji, where large 
slabs were used thus for facings, but it is not impossible that 
this style was diffused to Tonga. from the Society Islands. 
Farther to the west in Polynesia, this type of stone work dis-
appears. 
:EMORY (rn, p. 49) remarks that facings of more than .one 
course of cut stone do not appear in Polynesia outside of 
Tahiti, the Marquesas, Hawaii (exceptional) and Easter Is-
land. 
But in none of these islands can the regular disposition 
of superimposed courses of cut stone compete vvith master-
pieces like the ahu Vinapu on Easter Island. 
The facing of 
the ahu Te Pito-te-kura (fig. 24), in Easter Island, is composed 
of slabs stood on edge side by side, a style common ip. the 
Society Islands and the Tuamotus. 
Easter Islanders perfected to a high degree techniques which 
were known by other Polynesians. 
Much of their style may 
have developed locally. The sporadic distribution of the use 
of jointing does not suggest any one center of distribution. 
This specialization in the art of fitting stones seems to have 
been invented in a number of regions; nowhere is it a dominant 
feature of architecture. 
Statues. 
The carving of human images from wood and, less often, 
from stone is one of the culture traits which distinguish eastern 
and marginal Polynesia from western Polynesia, ~here carv-
ing of human figures is less developed (BURROWS, ,6 ms.). 
129 
In the entire Polynesian area, stone images of great size 
were carved only in the Marquesas, Raivavae, and Easter 
Island. 
In these three regions tuff is abundant, and it pro-
vided an easily worked material, which stimulated stone car-
ving. 
In New Zealand, the Maoris also took advantage of the 
rhyolitic tuff deposits of Lake Rototua and carved two human 
figures which represented gods. 
As pointed out by LINTON (23, p. 88), everywhere in Poly-
nesia wood carving seemes to have preceded stone carving. 
The flat surfaces of the large stone images of Rano-raraku 
are strongly reminiscent of wood-carving (fig. 24-27). The 
wooden images of Easter Island have several features in com-
mon with the big statues. 
For instance, the hands are treated 
in the same fashion and the outline of the chin is similar. 
Howewer there is greater resemblance between the Easter 
Island stone statues and the Mangarevan wooden images 
than between the wood and stone images of Easter Island. 
Mangarevan images share with the Easter Island stone sta-
tues the typical pursed mouth. 
However, the differences 
are numerous. 
For instance, Mangarevan images always re-
present the whole body with the arms separate from the bust. 
BALFOUR (r, p. 370), overlooking the Mangarevan parallels, 
stresses the simµarity between the Easter Island stone images 
and canoe-prow gods and other representations 
of human 
form from New Georgia, San Cristoval, and other parts of the 
Solomon Islands .. The proposed analogy does not strike me as 
convincing. 
First', the Melanesian figures shown by BAL-
FOUR have a snoutlike mouth which has nothing in common 
with the thip protruding lips of Easter Island heads. 
That 
this snout is due to the influence of a .bird motif, fused with 
the human form; makes the parallel less convincing. 
Second, 
BALFOUR remarks that the eyes are usually indicated in 
carved heads of the Solomon Islands. The only similarities be-
tween the two types of image are the overhanging brows and 
the long upward-curving nose. These are meager analogies 
9 

--- PAGE 15 ---
130 
to assume a connection between the giant statues of Easter 
Island and the canoe-prow gods of the Solomons. Such an 
affiliation would make the Solomon Islanders colonize Easter 
Island and there change the carving of the prow-gods into 
isolated monoliths, the snout of the original type becoming 
merely a scornful mouth. 
The Solomon art which, on that 
hypothesis, so strongly influenced Easter Island, was without 
effect in the rest of Polynesia. 
I have elsewhere disposed of the wild theory that the 
stone cylinders on the top of the statues represented the 
frizzly, bleached hair of Melanesians. 
It is likely that the 
Easter Island stone hats figured a top-knot, ~ut why should 
they symbolize the bleached frizzly hair of Solomon Islanders? 
BALFOUR (r) even says that if these hats were not centered 
on the top of the head it was for the purpose of combining with 
the representation of the hair mass, the effect of the forward-
projecting, palmleaf eyeshade, worn in Melanesia. This is a 
rare flight of imagination. 
There are no eyeshades in the 
Easter Island culture; no palms in its flora. The hypothesis 
rests on a postulate that the Easter Islanders were Melane-
sians, a view which can no longer be supported. 
If Easter 
Island culture was superior to any other Polyneisian cul-
ture in stone work, why need we assume that its origin was 
Melanesian? Were Melanesians better able than the Polyne-
sians to carve large images and to build stone structures? 
Such a thing is hard to demonstrate. 
Comparative studies of the religious structures in eastern 
and central Polynesia reveal a remarkable analogy between 
the position of the Easter Island statues on the ahus and the 
uprights on the religious platforms of the Tuamotu, Society, 
and Necker Islands. 
Detailed research has convinced EMORY 
that the uprights at the back of the Tuamotuan ahus were 
backrests for the gods or were memorials to deified ancestors. 
In the Tuamotus and in Tongareva the uprights were some-
times trimmed. In the Tuamotus the shaping is often a crude 
attempt to express the human form. It is evident that on 
r31 
N eek er Island the stone images of the gods rested against the 
slabs set on the platform. 
EMORY informed me that the Tua-
motuan slabs bear names' of ancestors, but these slabs are 
memorials to ancestral gods and are not images or represen-
tations of the gods. Between a carvec. upright and a statue, 
transition 
is logical,. and it seems to have taken place on 
Easter Island. The development of the slabs into statues was 
facilitated by Some knowledge of carving which the Easter 
Islanders already possessed when they. sf'!ttled on. their isola-
ted island. On a few Easter Island ahus, pillars take the place 
of statues. 
In the place called Mataveri, on 
Island, 
a few upright slabs· were still standing a few years ago, b~t 
today only one remains in place. One of tb.ese slabs has one 
surface carved like the back of a statue. 
In the Marquesas, 
wooden or stone images stood on the me'ae, but their style 
strongly conventionalized -
bears little affinity with the rea-
listic images of Easter Island and does not suggest borrow:ng. 
Conclusions. 
The Easter Isl~nd stone statues may have evolved from 
the stone uprights on the back of the Tuamotuan and Societv 
ahus. 
The first immigrants to Easter Island probably. cam~ 
from eastern Polynesia and were acquainted with the carving 
of human figures from ,vood. 
Lacking wood in their new 
home, they applied their skiil to the Rano-raraku f;uff which 
is more easily worked than stone. Stimulated by the abund-
ance of tuff. and the ease with which statues could be trans-
ported across open country, they resorted to larger and 
larger creations until stone carving reached there a tlevelop-
ment greater than in any other part of Polynesia. 
Transportation of Stone Statues. 
The Easter" Islanders have never been able to explain how 
the big stone· images were transported to and erected on the 
platforms. 
To-satisfy inquirers they invented a myth which 
tells how the statues moved to the ahu by magic. This leg~ttd 
was briefly recorded in 1868 by RoussEL (26, p. 498): 

--- PAGE 16 ---
132 
"The great chief of that time, who, like his predecessors, 
was very powerful, ordered the statues to walk. 
Hearing his 
words, all the statues set out and picked out the places which 
wen:~ the most convenient to them. 
We may believe that on 
occasion of a feast all the tribes gathered and each one took 
its family gods and dra~ged them with hau ropes to their 
respective districts." 
PALMER (25, p. 181) probably 
heard this legend from 
RoussEL. 
He informs us that the 
1>great chief>> was Tukuiu 
(Tuu-ko-ihu). 
At the end of the last century a French priest 
(BuTAYE, 7, p. 29) was told practically the same story by the 
natives. 
When the people wanted the statues to go some-
where, they appealed to the priests, who ordered them to go 
to a certain place. The huge blocks moved for a distance and 
then stopped. 
Each day the priests repeated the charms 
until the images had reached the spot for which they were 
destined. 
In Father ZUMBOHN's account (vol. 6; p. 128), the 
statues 
moved toward their respecth
1e ahus at the will of 
the god Makemake. 
The only technkal 
information 
about transportation 
,vas 
obtained by JAUSSEN (20, p. 245). An Easter Islander named 
Haunoko told him that rounded boulders were put under the 
images and that the natives pushed, dragged and rolled them 
to the place of destination. 
GEISEI,ER (16, p. 12) reports that 
when he visited the quarry 
of Rano-raraku, 
the natives 
showed him by gestures that some holes along the crater's 
edge were connected with the operation of transporting 
the 
statues. 
The rope tenders stood in these depressions paying 
out slowly as the statues 
glided down hill, or they made 
turns around projecting blocks when the statues .had to be 
belayed. 
The statue 
was dropped into a hole which had 
been dug for it. 
ROUTLEDGE (27, p. 189) noticed a large number o{ stones 
behind the statues; these were evidently used when t,he images 
were erected. 
Some statues were left standing at an angle. 
The natives remember better that the hats were put on the 
133 
heads of statues ~y erfcting big piles of stones against an ima-
ge and then rolling. the cylinders over the stones. 
In dis-
cussion with present. Easter Islanders, I was told that levers 
(akaue) were used for transport and that taro and sweet pota-
toes were put under the statue for lubrication. 
There are no other data on the methods used for the trans-
portation and erection of the statues. 
This problem has been 
unnecessarily complicated by those who want to add mystery 
to the Island. 
The weight of the Easter Island images has 
usually been overestimated. 
Professor Delacroix, director 
of the Laboratory 
of Geology in Paris, has kindly calculated 
for me the specific gravity of the Rano-raraku tuff. The den-
sity of this.rock is 2-48. Taking this figure as a basis, Dr. C. 
K. WENTWORTH has tried to estimate the approximate weight 
of the average statue transported from the quarry to the ahu. 
Statues 4 or 5 meters tall weigh about 4 or 5 tons at the most. 
I doubt whether the weight of the giant statues which stand 
near the quarry exceeds 30 tons. 
Other Polynesians have carried blocks weighing as much as 
the Easter Island statues. 
A platform in a dance court (tohua) 
of Uahake-kua in the Marquesas includes boulders weighing 
from 3 to IO tons (LINTON, 23, p. 7). Some slabs used in the 
Marquesas structures were of considerable size. LINTON (23, 
p. IO) says that one which is 12 feet 4 inches long, is 8 inches 
thick at the top and 3 feet 6 inches wide. Methods of trans-
portation 
in the l\farquesas have been described by both 
HANDY {18, p. 150) and LINTON (23, p. 10). Stones weighing 
several tons were slung from a number of radiating poles res-
t~ng on the shoulders of a group of bearers. 
Rocks of great 
s1ze were also carried oi1 a kind of stretcher made of poles and 
logs, enabling a great number of men to lend their strength. 
Stones too large to be carried were rolled to the structures by 
means of levers (LrnToN, 23. p. 8). To raise the stones onto a 
platform the Marquesans resorted to a method similar to that 
reported for the Easter Island stone hats. 
LINTON (23, p. 8) 
wrote: 
»An incline of rough stone was then built against the 

--- PAGE 17 ---
134 
face of the platform, and the stones of the second or succes- · 
sive courses were rolled up the incline by prying and blocking. 
Informants insisted that the incline was not earth covered, as 
a rough and irregular surface prevented the rock from slipping 
back and gave better hold for the levers>>. 
Two sixty-ton vessels which had been carried inland by 
hurricanes were hauled back to the sea by MAORIS. It is said 
that 2,000 men united to transport one; the other was hauled 
by only 200 man. The enormous logs usea for the hulls of the 
Maori canoes were cut in. the inland forest and then hauled to 
the coast on skids. Though these ).ogs were hollowed on the 
spot, their weights must have been c<msiderable, no doubt 
comparable to the Easter Isl3:nd statues. 
Valuable data were 
recorded by BEST (5, p. 62-73) on the Ma(?ri method of hauling 
a cane. 
Three, four, or eight stout ropes, thick as a man's wrist, 
were attached to the bow and stern. The front ropes were for 
traction and those of the stern prevented the swaying of the 
log and checked its speed down a declivity. When the log had 
· to be lowered down a steep slope, the stern ropes were passed 
around a tree trunk and served to control the speed. The bow 
ropes were snubbed around trees and payed out gradually 
a method identical to that reported by Geiseler for lowering 
the statues dowrl the quarry siope. 'fhe whole operation was 
timed to singing. 
The erection of the famous trilithon of Tonga like that of the 
Easter Island statues has long been a puzzle, and many wild 
theories have been proposed fo explain its origin. MAC KERN 
(24, p. 64) obtained from an old Tongan a detailed and logical 
account of the method used. As it is probably similar to that 
resorted to by the Easter ,Islanders for erecting their statues, 
it is worth mentioning here.· , 
The pillars which weigh between 30 and 40 tons were quar-
ried near the shore. >>When theywere shaped they were drag-
ged over wooden skids, by means of heavy ropes and the com-
bined muscular power of many men>> (MAC KERN 24, p. 64). 
135 
Close to the pits where the columns were to stand an earth 
incline was built with a retaining wall of trees and b;ush. The 
stones were dragged to the edge of this mound and were then 
nicely balanced and carefully guided by ropes to fall endwise 
into the pits. The same method was employed for the lintel. 
~he earthen incline was removed leaving the trilithon in posi-
~10n. Other than the wooden skids and the ropes, the only 
implements used by the Tongans were blocking wedges and 
levers. 
To realize how the Easter Islanders carved and transported 
huge statues we must keep in mind the geographical fea-
tures of the island. 
Rano-raraku, the tuff quarry, is at the 
~nd of a large plain extending across the island. The ground 
1s stony, but in ancient times, when the island was covered by 
a mattress of high and slippery grass, the hauling of the sta-
tues ,vas certainly easier. The island of Motu-nui which has 
in p~rt retained its pre-European vegetation, is ca;peted with 
a thick layer of grass. This gives a good idea of the former as-
pect of the island before the arrival of ships. 
The >>roads>> 
that ROUTLEDGE found irradiating from the crater could not 
have been of much use for the transportation 
of the images, 
as they are far from being clear causeways. 
The size of many wooden implements used on Easter Island 
proves that pieces of wood of reasonable size were available~ 
Out of them were made the skids on which the statues were 
rolled. 
The 'hau' (Triumfetta Semitrilola) and paper mul-
berry furnished them with fibers for ropes. The small number 
of ropes used by the Maoris for dragging their canoes, points 
out that the Easter Islanders did not need more ropes than 
the island could supply. The greatest difficulty for the nati-
ves was the fragility of the soft tuff. To transport a carved 
statue without scarring it was no small problem and this, in 
my opinion, is the greatest achievement of the Easter Islan-
ders. 
When the JJ,1 
ercator decided to take an Easter Island 
sta!ue t_o Europe: ~he choice was restricted to a basalt image 
which, m the opimon of an expert, was the only one which 
fi 

--- PAGE 18 ---
136 
could be carried aboard safely. 
Lighter and better statues 
were discarded because of their brittleness. 
Easter Islanders 
dragged the statues on their .. broad, rough backs. 
Damages 
could have easily been repaired when the statue was erected. 
The transport was not accomplished in a few days: the statues 
were hauled a short distance at. a time. 
On Easter 
Island 
as 0:rt the Marquesas 
(HANDY, 
18, 
p. 206), the statues may, have been moved by a ·whole tribe 
working together. 
A hundred or two hundred men might 
have united to carry the image over the plain, but more of 
course were nece$sary when a statue was to be pushed over 
a hill. 
That the modern natives have forgotten the methods used to 
transport the statues is curious but understandable. 
The mis-
sionaries probably did not inquire thoroughly about the me-
thod, and the natives have a disconcerting way of forgetting 
the past. 
There is not a native on the island who is able to 
explain the use of the stone adzes which are found daily on the 
ground, though implements were used by their great grand-
fathers or even by their grandfathers. 
If, in 1867, the natives 
could not remember the. technique of hauling the statues, we 
may assume that the construction and the transportation 
of 
the images ended only a few generations ago. This is not im-
possible. It is possible that war exterminated the expert stone 
carvers at Rano-raraku, 
and thus interrupted 
tradition. 
RoussEL remarks in his manuscript that the farther one goes 
from the quarry the smaller are the statues and his statement 
is correct (fig. 27). 
The greatest images, which weighed 
20 to 30 tons, were not carried far from the quarry. 
They 
were set up at the face of the hill, and only a few had been 
removed some distance from the slope. This indicates that 
resourcefulness and manpower were limited. 
One large por-
tion of the north coast (near Hango-teo) has no image ahu. 
The region is too steep and rocky for the transportation 
of 
statues. 
The only image found there is of basalt and was car-
ved on the spot. 
137 
It has been suggested that the Easter Islanders transported 
their big images on rafts. 
This is absurd, for there was not 
enough wood on the island for the construction of rafts large 
enough for such transport, and the rocky coast near Rano-
raraku 
affords no good landing place. · The Easter Island 
statues were probably hauled by ropes and skids. 
If there 
was sufficient wood, the smaller statues might have been car-
ried on litters 
a method much used in ~he Marquesas. How-
ever, I think that litter transport was not possible for the lar-
ger statues. 
l

--- PAGE 19 ---
Bibliography. 
r. 
BALFOUR, HENRY, Some ethnological 
suggestions 
in regard to Easter 
Island 
or Rapanui: 
Folk-lore, 
vol. 28, pp. 356-381. 
London, 
1917. 
2. 
BEECHEY, F. W., Narrative 
of a voyage to the Pacific and 
Strait (1825-28), 
2 vol. London, 1831. 
3. 
BENNET, WENDELI, Cr,ARK, Archeology of Kauai. 
Bernice P. Bishop 
Mus., Bull. 80, Honolulu, 
1931. 
4. 
BEST, ELSD0N., The Maori, 2 vols. 
Wellington, 
1924. 
5. 
The Maori Canoe. 
Dominion 
Museum, 
Bull. 7, Wellington, 
1925. 
6. 
BURROWS, EDWIN G., Western 
Polynesia. 
A study 
in 
cultural 
differenciation 
(ms. in Yale University 
Library). 
7. 
BU'l'AYE, ISIDORE. Ile de Paques. 
Un mot 
des tablettes 
et des 
statues colossales de l'Ile de 
Annales des Sacres Coeurs. 
Nouvelle serie, 8eme annee, no. 1, Paris 
1901. 
8. 
CooK, JAMES. A voyage 
towards 
the 
South 
Pole and round 
the 
world. 
(1772-u75), 
2nd. ed., London. 
1777. 
9. 
COWAN, JAMES, The Maori of New Zealand. 
Auckland, 
1910. 
10. 
EMORY, KENNE1.'H P., Archeology 
of Nihoa 
and 
Necker 
Islands. 
Bernice P. Bishop Mus., Bull. 53, Honolulu, 
1928. 
II. 
Stone remains in the Society Islands. 
Bernice P. Bishop Mus., 
Bult 
u6, 
Honolulu, 
1933. 
12. 
-
-
Tuamotuan 
stone structures. 
Bernice P. Bishop Mus., Bull. 
118, Honolulu, 
1934. 
13. 
-
-
Archeology 
of the 
Pacific 
Equatorial 
Islands. 
Bernice 
P. 
Bishop Mus., Bull. 123, Honolulu, 
1934. 
14. 
The Archeology 
of Mangareva. 
Ms. in Bernice 
P. Bishop 
Mus. 
15 
FORSTER, GEORGE., A voyage round the world in H. B. M.'s sloop 
>>Resolution>► (1772-1775), 
London 
1777. 
16. 
GEISELER, Die Oster-InseL 
Berlin, 
1883. 
17. 
GONZALEZ, Don Felipe, The voyage 
of . • . . . . to Easter 
Island 
in 
1770-71 
(translated 
by B. G. Corney). 
Ha\duyt 
Soc., 2d ser., 
vol. 13, Cambridge, 
1908. 
18. 
HANDY, E. S. CRAIGHII,L, The native 
culture 
in the 
Marquesas. 
Bernice P. Bishop Mus., Bull. 9, Honolulu, 
1923. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
27. 
28. 
30. 
31. 
139 
HIR0A, TE RANGI, Ethnology 
of Tongareva. 
Bernice P. Bishop Mus., 
Bull. 92. 
Honolulu, 
1932. 
JAUSSEN, TEP ANO, L'Ile de Pa.ques. 
Historique 
et ecritl.~re. 
Bulletin. 
de Geographie 
historique 
et descriptive. 
No. 2, pp. 240-270. 
Paris, 1893. 
LA PEROUSE, J. F. DE G., The voyage 
of La Perouse 
round 
the 
world. 
London, 
1798: 
2 vols. 
LAVACHERY, HENRY, Ile de Paques. 
Paris 1935. 
LINTON, RALPH, Archeology 
of the Marquesas 
Islands. 
Bernice P. 
Bishop ·Mus., Bull. · 23, Honolulu, 
1925. 
MCKERN, W. C., Archeology 
of Tonga. 
Bernice 
P. Bishop 
M:u,s., 
Bull. 
60, Honolulu, 
1929. 
PALMER, J. H. LINTON, A visit to Easter Island, or Rapa Nui in 1868. 
The Journal 
of the ,Royal ,Geographical 
Society, vol. 40, pp. 
167-181. 
London, 
1870. 
ROUSSEL, HIPPOL YTE, Ile de Paques. 
Annales 
des Sacn~s Coeurs, 
nos. 305-309, 
pp. 
423-430, 
495-499. 
Paris 1926. 
ROUTLEDGE, C. S., The mystery 
of Easter 
Island. 
London 
,1919. 
SK0TTSBERG, CARI,., The natural 
history 
of Juan 
Fernandez 
and 
Easter Island, 
Uppsala, 
1920. 
THOMSON, W. F., Te Pito 
Henua 
of Easter 
Island. 
Smithsonian 
Inst. 
Ann, Rept. 
for 1889, pp. 447-553. 
Washington, 
1891. 
THRUM, THOS. G., Hawaiian 
temple structures. 
Special publ. B. P. 
Bishop Mus., no. 7, pp. 86-go, 
192r. 
_ 
ZUMBOHM, GASPARD, i>Lettres du ......... 
au Directeur 
des Annales 
sur la mission de l'ile de Piques,» 
Annales de fa Congregation 
des Sacres-Coeurs 
de Jesus et de_ Marie, vol. .5, pp. 660--667, 
Paris, 1879. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
140 
Figure 
r. 
build r . 
Ahu in cour e of construction: 
shows technique 
used by ahu 
Platform 
built fir t, th n fa\ade; 
rectangular 
basalt slab 
tancl 
on edge. 
Figure 
2. 
Sid 
Yiew of ahu Mahatua. 
'otice 
alient 
and corner. 
Figure 
4. 
Figure 3. 
Inland 
slope of an ahu, Hango-teo 
Bay. 
tatues lying on slope of an ahu, situated 
between La Perouse 
Bay and Tongariki. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Figure 5. 
Paved slope of ahu Hanga-o-honu, 
at La Perouse Bay. 
Figure 6. 
Lateral 
view of ahu Mahatua, 
showing slanting 
retaining wall 
along end of wings. 
Pyramidal 
structure 
on ahu of later con truction. 
143 
Figure 7. 
ea ward Fac;:ade of_ Ahu-te-peu. 
Fitted ma onry. 
Figure 8. 
eaward fac;:ade of ahu Vinapu. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
r44 
r45 
Figure 
rr. 
mall ahu, between La Perouse 
Bay and ahu Mahatua. 
Figure g. 
Rounded corner of ahu Vinapu. 
Figure 
ro. 
Ahu Ihu-arero, 
near La Perouse Bay. 
Figure 
12. 
The ·salient 
of ahu Hanga-o-honu 
at La Perouse 
Bay. 
IO 

--- PAGE 23 ---
Figure 
13. 
Partial 
view of upper platform 
of ahu Hanga-o-honu. 
Large 
slabs 
on platform 
are p destals 
for statues. 
Figure. 
14. 
Seaward fa9ade of ahu Ohau. 
Fitted 
masonry. 
147 
Figure 15. 
Right wing of ahu Ohau. 
This wing is threatened 
by destruc-
tion; fissure 
along 
cliff 
cuts 
ahu. 
/OM. == 
i: ": 
Figure 
16. 
Plan of ahu Ohau. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
Figure 
17. 
Ahu Atu-o-puna, 
near ahu Ohau; semi-pyramidal 
ahu. 
Figure 
18. 
emi-pyramidal 
ahu between La Perouse Bay and ahu Maha-
tua, 
on north 
coast. 
Figure 
19. 
Ahu-poepoe near ahu Mahatua, 
north coast. 
Figure 
20. 
Ahu Te Ava (ahu-poepoe type), near Anakena Bay. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
Figure 
2r. 
\\ edge- hap d ahu (ahu-peopoe typ ), Hangoteo 
Bay. 
Notice 
mall pillar 
n 
nd of ahu. 
Figur 
22. 
R ctangular 
ahu (ahu-avanga type), 
near 
nak na Bay. 
151 
____ 2. Jo i1. __________ 
_ 
__1.IOM. 
__ 
6M. 
Fi ur 
23. 
Plan of a rectangular 
ahu. 
Figure 
24. 
Platform 
of ahu Te Pito-t 
-kura. 
dg. 
ne row of 
labs set on 

--- PAGE 26 ---
153 
on slope Rano-raraku. 
Figure 27. 
Hats of. stone images lying on slope of ahu Hanga-o-honu. 
Figure 26. 
Back 
of statue 
on slope of Rano-raraku. 
Figure 28. 
Giant statue 
lying on slope of ahu Akahanga, 
south coast. 
