--- PAGE 1 (journal p. cover (JSTOR)) ---
THE KINGS OF EASTER ISLAND: Kingship 
Author(s): Alfred Metraux 
Source: The Journal of the Polynesian Society , June, 1937, Vol. 46, No. 2(182) (June, 
1937), pp. 41-62
 
Published by: The Polynesian Society 
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/20702667
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/20702667?seq=1&cid=pdf-
reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide 
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and 
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at 
https://about.jstor.org/terms
The Polynesian Society  is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to 
The Journal of the Polynesian Society
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 2 (journal p. 41) ---
 41
 THE KINGS OF EASTER ISLAND
 By Dr. Alfred Metraux
 Bishop Museum Fellow, Ethnologist to Bishop Museum.*
 KINGSHIP
 E old social order of Easter island was entirely
 destroyed in 1862 when Peruvian slave traders
 kidnapped a large part of the population. They took to
 the guano islands on the Peruvian coast, not only the king
 with many members of his family, but a considerable
 number of the learned men (maori). This catastrophe,
 disrupting the traditional mode of living, created a state
 of anarchy and confusion. But the events of the years
 that followed were even more disastrous. Epidemics of
 smallpox, introduced by the few kidnapped men who
 returned to their island, decimated the population and
 struck the last blow to native culture. When the missionaries
 arrived in 1864, they were surprised to meet such complete
 ignorance of the past, such rudimentary forms of religion,
 and such disintegration of social organization. They found
 only the ruins of a civilization. In large measure they too
 accelerated the change and the obliteration of the past.
 Maurata, who is always designated as the last king
 of Easter island, died in the guano islands. But when
 the missionaries went to Easter island there still existed
 a shadowy kingship incarnated in the person of a 12-year
 old boy. He was Gregorio, probably the son of Te Pito, who
 was the uncle of King Maurata, since Maurata was the
 son of Kaimakoi-iti, and, according to Lapelin (9, p. 109),
 Te Pito was the brother of Kaimakoi. The young King
 Gregorio was an intelligent boy who died, a catechumen
 in the Mission, when he was twelve, " equally regretted
 by the missionaries and his subjects " (Roussel, 15, p. 358).
 Speaking of the same little king, a missionary states that
 the natives felt for him a certain respect ; " they would
 bring him the first yams, but he never interfered in affairs
 of state " (Ollivier, 12, p. 255).
 * Dr. M?traux was a member of the Franco-Belgian expedition
 to Easter island in 1934.
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 3 (journal p. 42) ---
 42 JOURNAL OF THE POLYNESIAN SOCIETY
 With the death of Gregorio the kingship came to an
 end. The missionaries mention no successor, and travellers
 who called at Easter island from this time down to 1886
 have not alluded to a king nor to anyone who could be so
 considered. It is true that Pinart (14, p. 236) speaks of
 Koreto as the queen of the island, but Pinart seems to have
 been imaginative and naive, and his statements are not
 always reliable. Certainly Koreto must have had not a
 little power since she was the wife of Dutroux-Bornier,
 the despotic ruler of the island. However, it is probable
 that only her exceptional position as the wife of a white
 man gave her such authority. Pinart must have misunder
 stood many things; it could hardly have been possible for
 Koreto to be at one time the queen and the regent ruling
 the island in the name of one of her daughters. One of
 Koreto's children is still living, but I have never heard
 that she had the slightest royal prerogative or pretension.
 As a matter of fact, Koreto was only the wife of a chief
 before she became the mistress of Dutroux-Bornier and
 thus must have had a certain rank and a certain prestige.
 When Geiseler (7, p. 23) inquired about her, he was told
 that a queen of that name had never existed.
 Not until after the Chileans had taken possession of
 the island did the question of a king again arise. Although
 the islanders of to-day speak of the late kings, Atamu Te
 Kena and Riroroko, as if they were really kings, informants
 make it clear that they had very little in common with
 the ariki of olden days. Their power was of an indefinite,
 dubious nature, and they seem to have enjoyed none of
 the prerogatives of former ariki. Perhaps their only claim
 to the title lay in their descent-line; both belonged to the
 Miru group. Possibly if native civilization had continued,
 they might have been true kings. Personal pretension,
 supported by Chilean officers who needed a responsible
 intermediary to deal with the population, might have
 contributed toward the restoration of power to this fictitious
 and ephemeral royalty. Atamu Te Kena Maurata was made
 a " king " by the Bishop of Tahiti, Tepano Jaussen, who
 needed someone on the island to represent the interests
 of the missionaries (see Estella, 4, p. 118). Atamu Te Kena
 Maurata died about 1890 and was succeeded by Riroroko.
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 4 (journal p. 43) ---
 The Kings of Easter Island
 43
 In 1898 Riroroko went to Chile to complain about abuses
 perpetrated on the natives, and died a few days after
 landing in Valparaiso, probably from over-indulgence in
 brandy. Since his time there has been no king on the island.
 Twenty years ago the Chilean officers of the Baquedano
 tried to proclaim my informant, Juan Tepano, king. His
 new dignity was conferred upon him in a public ceremony,
 but no one took it very seriously, not even the new sovereign
 himself. There is still on the island a Riroroko, son of
 the late king, who could pretend to royal dignity, but he
 seems uninterested.
 As kingship disintegrated at a very early date, infor
 mation about the powers of the ariki, his functions, and
 his authority is extremely deficient. Some interesting
 facts are to be found in the letters and the reports of the
 missionaries, especially in the notes of Father Roussel,
 published recently and not hitherto utilized. Mrs. Routledge
 heard a few anecdotes about King Nga-ara, who reigned
 shortly before the raid of the Peruvian slavetraders, from
 Te Haha, one of his attendants. The memories of the old
 man were neither very numerous nor especially illuminating.
 From my informants I was able to obtain some new details
 and to collect several legends expressing the sacredness of
 the king. By combining these several sources of inf ormation
 it is possible to reconstruct, at least partially, the main
 features of kingship on the island.
 Father Roussel seems to have best understood the true
 nature of kingship. His definition of the king's status
 (Roussel, 15, p. 358) is in accord with the scattered
 information gathered from other sources : " these kings
 who in the beginning were considered deities and had
 absolute power on the island, did not retain such authority
 for long, but only the prestige of a supernatural power
 with certain personal privileges." I shall show later that
 the political power of the king, if there was any at all, was
 slight at least during the last period of Easter island history.
 His exalted position rested mainly on the religious beliefs
 of the natives, and his functions, although limited, had a
 strong bearing upon the magico-economic structure of the
 island culture.
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 5 (journal p. 44) ---
 44 JOURNAL OF THE POLYNESIAN SOCIETY
 The ariki-mau, or king of Easter island, was a divine
 chief descended from the gods. The several lists of kings
 record as their common ancestor King Hotu-matua who
 settled on the island with his retainers. This king is
 probably an historical character who was never deified. The
 evidence for the exalted ancestry of the ariki-mau is to
 be inferred from several details which are apparently not
 connected but which if carefully considered throw a new
 light on this obscure question. My informant, Victoria
 Rapahango, an intelligent woman belonging to the royal
 descent-group of the Miru, told me on several occasions
 that the kings always belonged to the Honga, a lineage
 or sub-group of the Miru. Thanks to Mrs. Routledge some
 genealogies of the founders of the lineages in the Miru
 descent-group have been preserved and published recently
 by Williamson (19, vol. 2, p. 57). The two first ancestors
 of Honga were Tangaroa and Rongo. There is of course
 no direct proof that this Tangaroa and Rongo were identical
 with the well-known gods of Polynesia, since they may have
 been human kings with the same names, but it is highly
 probable that they were the same gods so frequently claimed
 as ancestors by chiefly families in the Society islands and
 the Tuamotus. There are further details which show that
 Tangaroa and Rongo were known as gods to the Easter
 islanders.
 The ariki-mau, or divine chief, possessed mana and
 was surrounded by tapus. A king with an oversupply of
 mana might be a danger to his people. The following legend
 tells of an ariki whose mana produced many wonders,
 although it was a source of calamity to others:
 He tuki te ariki ko Nga-ara
 etoru vie i Ahu-te-peu. He tupu
 te nga vie atotoru. Vie he poreko
 te poki rae a Nga-ara o te ariki.
 He tehe mai te mukomuko, te
 huhu ki te ariki poki a Nga-ara.
 He poreko te Poki atotoru vie
 ko Rokoroko-he-tau, te ingoa o tau
 poki era. Tau nga poki rae era
 a Nga-ara m? tae mana, etahi no
 ariki mana ko Rokoroko-he-tau.
 King Nga-ara slept with his
 three wives in Ahu-te-peu. The
 three women became pregnant.
 The first child of King Nga-ara
 was born. People brought flower
 wreaths and standards for the
 royal child of Nga-ara. The child
 of the third woman was born and
 Rokoroko-he-tau was his name.
 The first children of Nga-ara had
 no mana, only one had mana and
 this was Rokoroko-he-tau.
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 6 (journal p. 45) ---
 The Kings of Easter Island
 45
 Ana he tomo te niuhi ki uta,
 he tute i te tangata. He tomo te
 pakia ki uta, he tutute, he kai i
 te tangata. He mataku te tan
 gata, he topa te moa tea ritorito
 0 Rokoroko-he-tau. He toru m?
 mana o tau ariki era ko Rokoroko
 he-tau. He mataku te ariki a
 Nga-ara o te tangata ku pae ana
 1 te niuhi pakia te kai. He t5 mai
 tau poki era, i toke no mai i te
 po, he oho mai, he n? i Rano-aroi
 i runga i te maunga iti. I roto
 i te ana i n? i tau ariki mana
 era ?na te hau teatea.
 He ui a Nga-ara o te mukomuko
 kore, etahi no ariki i tehe o te
 mukomuko ko Rokoroko-he-tau
 ana. He hoki hakaou mai te
 ariki a Nga-ara, he tingai ia
 Rokoroko-he-tau. He tingai, mate
 i mate era. Kai hoki hakaou mai
 te niuhi, te pakia ki te tangata
 kai. He ngaro takoa tau moa tea
 era ina Rokoroko-he-tau te ariki.
 He ora te tangata, te vie, te poki.
 He oti te ?mu o te pakia, o te
 niuhi.
 Sharks came to the country and
 chased the people. Seals landed
 on the land and chased and ate
 the people. The people were
 terrified. White fowls of Roko
 roko-he-tau appeared. These were
 the three things which manifested
 the power of Rokoroko-he-tau.
 Nga-ara was afraid that the
 sharks and the seals would make
 an end of the people by eating
 them. He took the child; he stole
 him during the night and con
 cealed him near the Rano-aroi
 on a small mountain. He hid in
 a cave the king whose mana was
 the white-feather diadem.
 Nga-ara saw that they wore no
 wreaths and that only one king
 received them, and this was Roko
 roko-he-tau. The king Nga-ara
 went back to kill Rokoroko-he-tau.
 He killed him and he died. The
 sharks and the seals never came
 back to eat the people. The white
 fowls of King Rokoroko-he-tau
 also disappeared. Men, women,
 and children were saved. The
 tale of the sharks and seals is
 finished.
 This brief legend emphasizes the extreme importance
 of mana. Although the other two sons of Nga-ara were
 born before Rokoroko-he-tau they were without mana. The
 mana manifested itself in the third son for some mysterious
 reason, perhaps because the mother was of higher rank
 than the other wives. Often in Polynesia the birth of the
 divine chief was associated with many portents and wonders,
 but in this tale the phenomena which accompanied the birth
 of the king were emanations from his mana and were the
 cause of his destruction. It was also the mana of the king
 which produced the white fowls that became extinct after
 his death. Such an essential attribute of a king was the
 possession of mana that/though the people suffered from
 the noxious overload of mana, they refused to pay any
 attention to the first-born sons of Nga-ara. They recognized
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 7 (journal p. 46) ---
 46 JOURNAL OF THE POLYNESIAN SOCIETY
 as ariki only Rokoroko-he-tau to whom they presented
 wreaths and standards?tributes of respect and honour.
 Another legend, strange and incomprehensible in its
 present form, deals with the mana of a king and his
 miraculous birth. Much of this tale which appears to be
 mysterious would perhaps be clearer if we knew a little
 more about the kingship and its supernatural powers. It
 is perhaps not merely chance that the name of the father
 of the ariki who is the principal character in the legend
 is Tangaroa, the same as that of the god who was the
 probable ancestor of the royal Honga family.
 He iri mai Tangaroa raua t?na
 taina i te po, he amo mai i te
 kupenga-viri mo te ika mo tuku
 i Hangat?. He t? i Hangat?
 he tuku, he rav? te ika, he oho
 ki Huareva, ki Akahanga. I Ana
 vaero he tik?ra te uha etahi i
 runga i te maea. He oho te
 rima, he t? mai i tau uha era
 mai runga mai te tau, he mau,
 he oho, he t? ki Hanga-nui. Ku
 moe ana Tangaroa i tau uha era
 i Ana-vaero i moe ro ai. He mau,
 he oho mai, he t? ki Hanga-nui
 te hanga mounga. E uru vai i te
 ika. He tomo ararua ko te tangata
 taina ki uta, he oho ki te Vai
 mangaro, he hohapu. He t? Tanga
 roa, he tingai ki tau uha era,
 he umu, he hakat? i tau uha
 era i roto i te taheta; he noho
 te kokoma, te hatatu. He amo
 te ika, etahi amo i kupenga, he
 oho he hoki ararua. He t? ki
 T?-tapu a Tangaroa. He noho.
 He turu te nuahine etahi mai
 te Hakarava ki te vai ?tu mai
 Hanga-nui mai raro mai te puna.
 I ka t? atu ko te poki e tangi
 no ana i roto te taheta, tau poki
 era he tangi era mai roto mai
 te hatatu moa. He oho atu tau
 nuahine era, he ?tu mai i tana
 vai irae, he hoki mai, he t? tau
 poki era, he hapai, he iri, he ?
 Tangaroa and his brother
 walked to the beach one night.
 He was carrying the net kupenga
 viri to catch fish at Hangat?. He
 arrived at Hangat?, he fished and
 caught some fish, he went to
 Huareva and to Akahanga. At
 Ana-vaero he saw a hen on a stone.
 He extended his hand, took the
 hen from its roost, carried it, went
 away and came to Hanga-nui.
 Tangaroa copulated with this hen
 in Ana-vaero. He took the hen,
 he set out walking and arrived
 at Hanga-nui, at the end of the
 bay. He entered the water to
 catch fish. The two brothers came
 back to the beach and they went
 to Vaimangaro where they bathed.
 Tangaroa took the hen, killed it,
 plucked it, put it into a basin, in
 which the stomach of the fowl
 remained. One carried fish, the
 other the fishing-net, both left and
 went back. Tangaroa arrived at
 T?-tapu. They stayed there.
 An old woman from Hakarava
 went down to Hanga-nui to draw
 water out of a well. When she
 arrived the child was crying in
 the basin from within the stomach
 of the hen. The old woman went
 and first drew water out of the
 well, then she carried him in her
 arms, entered her house, heated
 stones, washed the child with hot
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 8 (journal p. 47) ---
 The Kings of Easter Island
 47
 ki roto ki te hare, he tunu maea
 vera, haka hopu i te poki hai
 vai vera, he maitaki, he hakamoe
 te nuahine, he kimi te nuahine
 hai vie u, he pava mo haka
 omoomo o tau poki era. He nape
 te ingoa ko Tu-ki-haka-he-vari te
 ingoa o te poki era. He hang?i,
 he nuinui, he noho i te Hakarava.
 He ui ki te nuahine : " He
 t?ku matua?" He ki te nuahine:
 " Ina ?u matua." He mou tau
 kope era. He t? hakaou t?na,
 he ui hakaou tau poki era : " He
 t?ku matua?" He ki tau nuahine
 era: "Ai te rangi e uri mai
 era." He noho, he ki ki te tan
 ga ta, he rangi : " Ka anga te
 rango mo t? i au mo oho kia
 T?." He anga te rango e te
 tangata. Erua vie roau ia Tu
 ki-haka-he-vari ko te nga m?
 rakerake, Aarapoto, o raua a
 Tu-ki-haka-he-vari te roau. He
 noho era, he oti te rango. He
 tangi Tu-ki-haka-he-vari mo tau
 nuahine hangai era ia ia. He
 tehe mai te tangata, te vie, he
 to ia Tu-ki-haka-he-vari, he oho
 kia T?, ki tona kona, he tupa,
 he oho te rango e te tangata,
 e te vie. He oho era tangata,
 hoki mai te marnate. He oho era
 ko tangata ko ia he marnate era
 i te ara, he oho era, he mana o
 te ariki o Tu-ki-haka-he-vari. He
 mana o te ariki o Tu-ki-haka-he
 vari. He t? kia Pare ki tona
 kona, he noho ia Pare, he rangi
 mai ki te nga m? rakerake,
 Aarapotu : " Ka hoki te nga m?
 rakerake Aarapotu hakaoneone
 mata o Tu-ki-haka-he-vari, o te
 ariki." He rangi era te ariki
 a Tu-ki-haka-he-vari ki tau nga
 m? era Aarapotu. He hoki te
 tangata ko Hotu-iti, he noho te
 ariki Tu-ki-haka-he-vari i t?na
 kona, e hoki te tangata o Hotu
 iti ki toraua kona.
 water, made him clean, put him
 in bed, went looking for someone
 to suckle the baby. She gave
 him the name of Tu-ki-haka-he
 vari ( curled-up-as-a-chicken-in-an
 egg). She bred him, he grew up
 and stayed at Hakarava.
 He asked the old woman:
 " Where is my father?" The old
 woman said : " You have no
 father." The boy remained silent.
 One day the boy asked : " Where
 is my father?" The old woman
 said : " There where there is a
 dark cloud." He stayed, he said
 to the people, he shouted : " Make
 a litter for me to go to T?."
 The men made a litter. Two ugly
 women called Aarapoto were
 attending him. They waited until
 the litter was finished. Tu-ki
 haka-he-vari cried for the old
 woman who raised him. Men and
 women flocked to the place, they
 took Tu-ki-haka-he-vari, they
 walked toward T?, to his place,
 men and women were carrying
 his litter. The men who went
 with him died when they returned.
 The people who went with him
 died on the way because of the
 mana of the king, Tu-ki-haka-he
 vari. It was the mana of King
 Tu-ki-haka-he-vari. He arrived at
 Pare, his place, he remained there.
 He shouted to the two bad-looking
 girls, Aarapotu : " Turn back you
 bad-looking people, you are
 making dust for the eyes of Tu
 ki-haka-he-vari, the king." So
 shouted the king to the bad-look
 ing girls Aarapotu. The men of
 Hotu-iti went back. The king,
 Tu-ki-haka-he-vari remained in
 his country, but the men of Hotu
 iti went back to their country.
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 9 (journal p. 48) ---
 48 JOURNAL OF THE POLYNESIAN SOCIETY
 Although there is no way of knowing whether this
 tale refers to a legendary king with great mana or to the
 son of the god Tangaroa, it contributes to a better under
 standing of the various aspects of a king's personality.
 Here, as in the preceding tale, the king's mana is so
 strong that it becomes deadly, and those who carry him
 die. Moreover, the king is carried on a litter, probably
 to prevent any contact between the ground and the mana
 embodied in him. This is the only hint of such a custom
 on Easter island, but here again is an attitude which fits
 the Polynesian pattern of culture.
 The sacredness of the ariki-mau obliged both him and
 the people of lesser rank to subject themselves to a series
 of restrictions in their mutual relationships. The entire
 person of the king was tapu; no one could touch him without
 running the risk of falling dead or of suffering severe pain.
 The sacredness of the king's head is well illustrated by the
 following anecdote (Roussel, 15, p. 360) :
 "Their heads were tapu (sacred). They were
 obliged to let their hair grow without ever allowing
 the mata (cutting stone) to pass through it. I
 remember well that when I arrived on Easter island
 the young Gregorio was introduced to me as being
 the only real chief; he was also the one who wore
 the hair long. When for cleanliness sake I asked
 one of the Mangarevans who was with me to cut his
 hair, the child opposed it firmly and yielded only
 through force or fear. The anger was so general
 that the hairdresser was on the point of being stoned
 when he achieved his work."
 There is no doubt that the head of the king was the
 most sacred part of his person. The head of every man
 was more or less tapu; until recent times a mother was
 extremely careful to not eat above the head of her child.
 But from Roussel's text it would appear that only the king's
 head was so sacred that the hair on it could not be cut.
 However, a personal incident told by Te Haha, the attendant
 of King Nga-ara, to Routledge (16, p. 242) seems to indicate
 that other people, perhaps noblemen related to the king,
 were under the same tapu. Te Haha as a boy had " long
 hair reaching to his heels." One day when he was asleep
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 10 (journal p. 49) ---
 The Kings of Easter Island
 49
 in a cave somebody cut it off. Te Haha went to Nga-ara,
 and by means of a spell the king blasted the offender who
 died.
 The hands of kings were also tapu. The only activity
 permitted to the ariki was the recreation of making fishing
 lines and nets. They were also permitted to go fishing in
 canoes. The extremely contagious nature of the mana
 extended to all the belongings of the ariki, which were
 consequently tapu. " Their huts, their enclosures, their
 food, their entire persons and everything they used were
 tapu for other persons of both sexes " (Roussel, 15, p. 360).
 It was not permissible to see the king or his son eat
 or sleep, and none but the servants, who were noblemen
 (ariki), were allowed to enter his house. The respective
 functions of the two classes of servants, the t?ra and
 haka-p?pa, are defined in the following legend about the
 first chiefs to settle on the island:
 He noho ararua ko te t?ra, ko
 te haka-p?pa. He haka-p?pa mo
 noho i te hare o T?-ko-ihu. He
 t?ra mo turu ki te ika, mo hura.
 He kotea, he titi te ika kotea, he
 mau mai mo tao e te t?ra, mo
 haka uru kia T?-ko-ihu mo kai
 o te ariki mo inaki o te kumara,
 o te uhi ananake te ra. O te
 haka-p?pa ana v?i i te kai kia
 T?-ko-ihu peir? te t?ra o Hotu
 matua, te haka-p?pa o Hotu
 matua mo v?i i te kai kia
 Hotu-matua.
 There were two servants, the
 t?ra and the haka-p?pa. The
 haka-p?pa had to stay in the
 house of T?-ko-ihu. The t?ra
 went with nets to catch the kotea
 fish for him. He caught many
 kotea and the t?ra took them to
 be cooked and presented to T?
 ko-ihu for food, so that he had
 something to eat every day with
 the sweet potatoes and the yams.
 The haka-p?pa served the food to
 T?-ko-ihu. It was the same with
 Hotu-matua. He had a t?ra and
 a haka-p?pa to give food to him.
 The duties of the tura were not restricted to fishing.
 They provided for the entire maintenance of the king ; they
 tilled the soil, gathered seashells for him, and practised
 all kinds of fishing. The haka-p?pa attended the king in
 the capacity of valets. Among their functions was the
 serving of the king's meals. The fragment of legend quoted
 above speaks of only one t?ra and one haka-p?pa. The
 same informant who dictated this text told me on another
 occasion that there were several of each class of servants.
 As a matter of fact, he was not sure of the number.
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 11 (journal p. 50) ---
 50 JOURNAL OF THE POLYNESIAN SOCIETY
 Several foods were tapu to the king. He could not
 eat rats under any condition, and it is quite possible that
 the same tapu applied to the other members of the Miru.
 Te Haha, who gave so many important details to
 Mrs. Routledge (16, p. 242) about King Nga-ara, told her
 that one day the king went to him as he was watching rats
 being cooked. Nga-ara was extremely angry " for it
 transpired that, if Te Haha had eaten them, his power
 for producing chickens would have diminished ; presumably
 because he would have imbibed ratty nature, which was
 disastrous to eggs and young chickens." The mahore, kotea,
 pahika, and teteme, all small fish, were remembered as the
 king's fish. The tapu on tuna fish during the winter months
 did not apply to the king who with some noblemen could
 eat the fish without running the risk of being poisoned.
 The boat in which expert fishermen went to catch tuna
 during the tapu period belonged to the king. It was called
 vaka-vaero and was decorated with cock feathers. All fish
 caught from the vaka-vaero were presented to the king,
 who either kept them for his own use or, more often,
 distributed them among the tangata-honui (important old
 men). The first tuna taken after the lifting of the tapu
 in summer were taken to the king, who tasted a bit of the
 fish and gave the rest to the tangata-honui. The food for
 the king was strictly tapu and nobody but the t?ra could
 touch it.
 The dress of the king was not very different from
 that of any wealthy man. He wore a beautiful tapa cloak
 stained yellow (mia) with turmeric, and he covered his
 head with "feather hats of various descriptions." Six
 tahonga (wooden balls) and six small wooden crescents
 (rei-miro) called rei-matapuku, hung from his neck back
 and front. The wooden crescents had small shell tassels
 (rei-pipipipi) hanging from them. The only physical
 characteristic of the sons of kings was an alleged growth
 of down under the eyes.
 Nga-ara, the last king of the island to die with full
 rank had his headquarters at Anakena. At the bay of
 Anakena is the most pleasant part of the island. Hills
 surround the long sandy beach which slopes gently to the
 sea. The present natives are particularly fond of going
 there to swim and rest. They express their admiration
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 12 (journal p. 51) ---
 The Kings of Easter Island
 51
 of the favoured bay in the saying that "Anakena is the
 loveliest place in the world." Anakena cove has always
 played an important part in the history of the island. On
 its sandy shore King Hotu-matua landed, and there he died.
 Anakena was in the territory of the Honga lineage of kings.
 The six ahu which stand along the beach received the bones
 of the members of the Honga group, and the kings were
 buried there. At Anakena there was a school for chanters
 where the people gathered to hear the rongorongo men
 recite their chants.
 According to a tradition that I was unable to check,
 each new king went to live at Ahu-akapu, near Tahai on
 the west coast. Later, when he had yielded his authority
 to his son he went to Tahai and then to Anakena where
 he spent his last years. Nga-ara was the only king who
 died in Tahai and his remains were buried in the big ahu
 there. The young princes were raised in a village called
 Papa-o-pea, near Ohau, not far from Ahu-te-peu. In
 all of the literature on Easter island there is only one
 allusion to the kings' changes of residence. However,
 Mrs. Routledge (16, p. 279) has recorded a tradition
 according to which Hotu-matua, having quarrelled with his
 eldest son T?-maheke, gave up his position to his son and
 retired to the top of the Rano-kao where he lived on the
 south side of the crater, opposite to Orongo. Traditions
 connected with the ruins of Anakena make significant its
 prestige, and it is clear that Anakena was an important
 site and the one most closely associated with the memory
 of kings. There is no doubt that it was a royal residence,
 but with the present lack of knowledge the frequent and
 obligatory changes of the king's home are inexplicable and
 will undoubtedly remain so. Perhaps such changes con
 cerned only some kings of historical times and cannot be
 generalized. Often war obliged the king to move from his
 customary residence, though the sacredness of his person
 put him above the vicissitudes of the war. " Through
 prudence or fear some of them abandoned their homes to
 retire as far as possible from the war theatre, hence their
 sojourn at Hanga-roa, Anakena and Hotu-iti " (Roussel,
 15, p. 360).
 A king resigned his power in favour of his first-born
 son when he married. My informant, Juan Tepano, was
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 13 (journal p. 52) ---
 52 JOURNAL OF THE POLYNESIAN SOCIETY
 positive about this fact, which is confirmed by Roussel (15,
 p. 360). " The king resigned on the occasion of the marriage
 of his son, but his wedding could be delayed for a long time,
 since the custom of the country allowed him to marry only
 at an advanced age." Geiseler (7, p. 41) is certainly
 mistaken when he says that after the king's death the rule
 passed to his brother.
 The power of the king is extolled in a chant transcribed
 by Thompson (17, pp. 523, 524), but unfortunately the
 translation is so free that it is entirely unreliable. With
 the help of Tepano, I attempted to reconstruct and
 retranslate the native text which has been produced with
 scores of errors. There is no doubt as to the significance
 of the chant. It celebrates the beneficent influence of the
 king upon nature, especially on the sources of staple foods.
 On him depend the growth of plants, the abundance of
 fish, favourable atmospheric conditions, in a word everything
 related to food and the maintenance of life.
 Eaha to rail (?) ariki ki te
 mahua i uta nei?
 He tupu, tomo a Mata-mea i
 rangi rau (?), he tuatea to
 rau (?) ariki ki te mahua i
 uta nei.
 Anirato-maniroto ka rata te tua
 tea, ka rata te rangirangi, ka
 rata te tupuna.
 Eaha to rau ariki ki te mahua
 i uta nei?
 E ura, e pop?, e koiro, e nohu,
 to rau ariki ki te mahua i uta
 nei.
 Anirato-maniroto ka rata te ura
 ki kai ra, te pop?, e nehe, e
 riku, e kavakava-atua.
 Eaha to rau ariki ki te mahua i
 uta nei?
 E nehe, e riku, e kava-atua to
 rau ariki ki te mahua i uta
 nei.
 Anirato-maniroto ka rata te nehe,
 ka rata riku, ka rata raina
 kava-atua.
 What does the king make fertile
 in the country?
 Mars comes up, appears in the
 sky. The king makes the shoots
 of the white sweet-potatoes
 grow in the country.
 Now he makes the sweet-potatoes
 favourable, the sky favourable,
 the ancestors favourable.
 What does the king make fertile
 in the country?
 The crayfish, the fish, the
 conger eels, the nohu fish (ape
 fish?), the king makes fertile
 in the country.
 Now he makes the crayfish good
 to eat and the fish, the
 moss, the ferns, the kavakava
 atua plants.
 What does the king make fertile
 in the country?
 The mosses, the ferns, the kava
 kava-atua plants, the king
 makes grow in the country.
 Now he makes the mosses favour
 able, makes the ferns favour
 able, he makes the roots of the
 kavakava-atua favourable.
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 14 (journal p. 53) ---
 The Kings of Easter Island
 53
 Eaha to rau ariki ki te mahua
 i uta nei?
 He hahao nei e kahi, e atu, e
 ature.
 Anirato-maniroto ka rata te kahi,
 ka rata atu, ka rata te ature
 anirato.
 Eaha to rau ariki ki te mahua
 i uta nei?
 E uhi, e taro, e kumara to rau
 ariki i uta nei.
 Anirato ka rata te uhi, kumara,
 toa e mahua i uta nei, ana i
 roto maru.
 Eaha to rau ariki ki te mahua
 i uta nei?
 E honu, e keo, e pane te to rau
 an (a) ariki ki te mahua i uta
 nei.
 Anirato ka rata te honu, te keo,
 te pane.
 Eaha to rau ariki ki mahua i
 uta nei?
 E hetu, e rangi, e hanana, r?,
 he mahina to rau (a) (?) ariki
 ki te mahua irunga nei.
 Anirato ka rata te rangi, e
 hanana, e r?, e mahina.
 Eaha to rau ariki ki te mahua
 i uta nei?
 Ea runga (?) nei ka rata te hehu
 rangi, hanana, r?, mahina.
 Anirato ka rata te hehu rangi,
 hanana, r?, mahina.
 Eaha to rau ariki ki te mahua
 i uta nei?
 E ariki, e tapairu, to rau ariki
 ki te mahua i uta nei.
 Anirato ka rata te ariki, te
 tapairu.
 Eaha to rau ariki ki te mahua
 i uta nei?
 What does the king make fertile
 in the country?
 He introduces the tuna fish, the
 atu fish, and the ature fish.
 Now he makes the tuna fish
 favourable, he makes the atu
 favourable, he makes the ature
 favourable too.
 What does the king make fertile
 in the country?
 The yams, the taro, the sweet
 potatoes the king makes grow
 in the country.
 Now he makes the yams, the
 sweet-potatoes, the sugar cane,
 the shoots favourable in the
 country, in the shade.
 What does the king make fertile
 in the country?
 The turtle, its abdominal shell,
 its legs?these he makes grow
 in the country.
 Now he makes the turtle, its
 abdominal shell and its legs
 favourable.
 What does the king make fertile
 in the country?
 The stars, the sky, the heat, the
 sun, the moon, the king makes
 fertile there above.
 Now he makes the sky, the heat,
 the sun, and the moon favour
 able.
 What does the king make fertile
 in the country?
 Going up, he makes the dew, the
 heat, the sun, the moon favour
 able.
 Now he makes dew, the heat the
 sun, the moon favourable.
 What does the king make fertile
 in the country?
 The chiefs, the chief esses he makes
 favourable in the country.
 Now the king makes the chiefs,
 the chiefesses favourable.
 What does the king make fertile
 in the country?
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 15 (journal p. 54) ---
 54 JOURNAL OF THE POLYNESIAN SOCIETY
 E oioi, e potupotu, e ngarara, e
 hata to ran (a) ariki ki te
 mahua i uta nei.
 Anirato ka rata maniroto e oioi,
 e potupotu, e ngarara, e hata
 to ran (a) ki te mahua i uta
 nei.
 Worms, earwigs, beetles, the king
 makes fertile in the country.
 Now he makes the worms, the
 earwigs, the beetles favourable,
 he makes them grow in the
 country.
 In defining the main features of the king's personality,
 at the beginning of this essay, I mentioned among the salient
 characteristics of his position his bearing on the magico
 economic activity of the people. The intimate connection
 of the king with nature as revealed by the chant, is
 corroborated by many other references to his influence on
 the welfare of the people. There is still a belief among
 the natives that a great many food plants vanished from
 the island with the kings who controlled them. The favourite
 variety of sweet-potato called huatea is no longer found on
 Easter island. It could not exist without the king who
 made it grow, explained my informant. Thus, other plants
 and animals have deserted the island, and since the
 kidnapping of Maurata and his family no tortoises have
 appeared on the shore. The beneficial influence of the king's
 sacredness was shared by the ariki-paka or noblemen. Their
 skulls made the fowls lay eggs. The same power was
 probably ascribed to the head of the king, since otherwise
 the stealing of King Nga-ara's skull would remain
 unexplained (Routledge, 16, p. 246).
 The first-fruits of all the products of the land were
 presented to the king. Father Roussel (15, p. 360) writes:
 " Such offerings were brought to him with great
 ceremony. I was present when yams were presented
 to the little Gregorio who lived in our house. The
 bearers led the way, followed by a numerous suite
 and by two files of boys holding in their hands branches
 of hau, peeled and stained dark. The procession was
 more like torch-bearing at a funeral than anything
 else. From time to time the air sounded with cries
 and with chants I was unable to understand.
 " Only the king could initiate the harvesting of
 the crops which were tapu as long as he ordered them
 to be. Alas for the man who dared to violate the
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 16 (journal p. 55) ---
 The Kings of Easter Island
 55
 tapu. Often he was deprived of his property and
 possibly of his life."
 The tuna fish (kahi) caught by the fishermen were given
 to the king (Roussel, 15, p. 428).
 Certain religious functions, probably limited, were
 incumbent on the king. In time of drought he sent his
 son or another ariki-paka to perform rites in which Hiro
 was beseeched to make the rain fall. Such is the tradition
 obtained by Routledge (16, p. 242) and by me. Very likely
 the ariki-paka in charge of this duty was a high priest
 related to the king.
 The sacredness of the ariki-mau is beyond any doubt,
 but this does not imply that he was a priest (iviatua)
 inspired by the gods and with a complete knowledge of
 the ritual. In Polynesia the divine chiefs played only a
 passive part in the religious life and this was probably true
 of the Easter island king. The importance of the sacerdotal
 group which came right after the king and the lack of any
 reference to the king as a priest point out that his functions
 were not confused with the ritualistic and prophetic
 activities of the ordinary priests. But as descendant of the
 gods and as medium between his divine ancestors and the
 people, his personality could not be dissociated from the
 cult. Many of the king's duties were purely religious. He
 inaugurated the harvest, received the first fruits of the
 crops, consecrated new houses or canoes, placed or lifted
 tapu and presided over many ceremonies.
 All twins were presented to him to be given a " royal
 name." I was unable to get details about the special names or
 the mystical beliefs about twins which necessitate the inter
 vention of the arikL From vague traditions one may infer
 that the king had a supervisory authority over activities of a
 more or less religious nature. For instance, the learning of
 chants and the tattooing of young men, both of which had
 a great deal to do with religion, were under the king's
 control. Tradition tells that the young men, recently
 tattooed, gathered in Anakena and exhibited their designs
 to the king who sat on the head of an old image. The king
 examined their tattoo and if he was satisfied with the work
 of the artist he said to the young man, " Ka hoa ki Tuna
 roa " (Go to the ahu Tuna-roa), but if he judged the motifs
 poor he told the unfortunate bearer of them to " Ka hoa
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 17 (journal p. 56) ---
 56 JOURNAL OF THE POLYNESIAN SOCIETY
 ki ahu runga" (Go to the upper ahu). He criticized the
 form and the size of the piercings of the ears and probably
 the ornaments which were worn in them.
 There is still some mystery about the actual significance
 of the so-called Easter island script. The rongorongo men
 who used the tablets and chanted on festive occasions must
 have formed a class or group of expert reciters comparable
 to the rongorongo men of Mangareva. The learning of
 chants and the proper use of the tablets was a matter of
 interest to the king. Tradition recounts that each year
 the rongorongo men went to Anakena to read the tablets
 to the king. Te Haha told Mrs. Routledge (16, p. 245)
 that Nga-ara and his son, Kamakoi, " sat on seats made
 of tablets, and each had a tablet in his hand, they wore
 feather hats, as did all the professors." The people of the
 neighbouring districts brought offerings of food to Nga-ara
 for distribution among the rongorongo men. The king
 listened attentively to the chants and punished those who
 made mistakes, which caused them to be laughed at. If a
 quarrel arose among the people, the king sent a boy with
 a royal ensign (maru) to the fighters. The sight of the
 maru was enough to quiet their wrath. Mrs. Routledge
 (16, p. 246) adds:
 " When the function was over, the Ariki stood on
 a platform borne by eight men and addressed the
 rongorongo men on their duties, and doing well, and
 gave them each a chicken. ... In addition to the
 great day, there were minor assemblies at new moon,
 or at the last quarter of the moon, when the rongorongo
 men came to Anakena. The Ariki walked up and down
 reading the tablets, while the old men stood in a body
 and looked on. . . .
 " King Nga-ara used to travel around the island,
 staying for a week or two in the localities of the
 resident experts."
 Thompson (17, p. 514), who preceded Mrs. Routledge
 by forty years, was also told that the
 "... knowledge of the written characters was
 confined to the royal family, the chiefs of the six
 districts into which the island was divided, sons of
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 18 (journal p. 57) ---
 The Kings of Easter Island
 57
 those chiefs, and certain priests or teachers, but the
 people were assembled at Anakena Bay once each year
 to hear all the tablets read."
 In the legend of Rokoroko-he-tau it is told how the people
 brought wreaths (mukomuko) and standards (huhu) to the
 firstborn children of the king. Later, when they discovered
 that the third son was endowed with more powerful mana,
 they deserted the other ariki, bringing all the huhu and
 mokumoku to Nga-ara's third son, Rokoroko-he-tau. Roussel,
 in a text already referred to (15, p. 360), mentions the
 branches of hau peeled and stained dark and held by boys
 accompanying the people who presented the first-fruits to
 the king. The symbolism of such ensigns is not known,
 but they were probably brought before the king as a token
 of respect. Natives still remember such sacred ornaments
 and tell how once a month (Tepano insisted once a week)
 the people went to Anakena to present the ariki-mau with
 huhu and maru. My informant translated the word huhu
 as " standard " and described it as a pole with three to
 five small red, white, or black sticks inserted into it. The
 ends of such sticks were decorated with cock-feathers. The
 top of the huhu bore a long feather garland (maro) the
 like of which is still made by the natives for trade. The
 huhu and the maru were planted in the ground in front
 of the king's house and left there until they rotted. These
 huhu were apparently not the same as those made by the
 ariki-paka and placed in the taro- and yam-fields to make
 the rain fall.
 References to insignia are to be found in the accounts
 of the earlier voyagers. Behrens (1, p. 128) says that
 after some natives had been shot by the Dutchmen, " they
 came back to meet the foreigners with palm boughs and
 a sort of standard of red and white." His description fits
 the huhu that the Easter islanders presented to their
 mysterious and powerful visitors. The party sent by Cook
 to explore the interior of the island received honours which
 seem to be the same as those paid to ariki. Cook (2, vol. 1,
 p. 281) writes:
 " A middle-aged man, punctured from head to foot,
 and his face painted with a sort of white pigment,
 appeared with a spear in his hand and walked along
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 19 (journal p. 58) ---
 58 JOURNAL OF THE POLYNESIAN SOCIETY
 side of them, making signs to his countrymen to keep
 at a distance, and not to molest our people. When
 he had pretty well effected this, he hoisted a piece
 of white cloth on his spear, placed himself in the front
 and led the way, with his ensign of peace, as they
 understood."
 King Nga-ara " was visited one month in the year by
 all people who brought him the plant known as pua on the
 end of sticks, put the pua into his house, and retired back
 wards." (Routledge, 16, p. 243).
 Te Haha, who in his youth was of the court of King
 Nga-ara, told Mrs. Routledge (16, p. 242) that "if the
 people wanted chickens, they applied to the Ariki-mau, who
 sent him with maru, and his visits were always attended
 with satisfactory results."
 Nothing is known about the activities and duties of
 the king to suggest any great political power. He was not
 a ruler in the common sense of the word. So little has
 survived in the memory of the natives about the king's
 authority that Routledge (16, p. 242) could assume that
 the ariki-mau was " neither a leader in war nor the fount
 of justice, nor even a priest."
 It remains to determine clearly the position of the
 king and his possible influence in the political system of
 the island. Again the best source of information is Father
 Roussel (15, p. 360). About the king he makes a general
 statement that seems to be very near the truth:
 " In late times, although the kings were still
 surrounded with respect by the natives who considered
 their persons to be sacred, their authority was nil
 and entirely disregarded. It has passed entirely into
 the hands of the mata-toa [warriors] who decided
 everything and carried on the war without beforehand
 consulting his majesty."
 Of course the opinion of Roussel as to the extension
 of kingly power in ancient days is an entirely gratuitous
 assumption, but there is good evidence that his statement
 for historical times is quite accurate. Geiseler (7, p. 41),
 who visited the island in 1882 for a few days, is not a very
 reliable source, and he is also the only one who says that
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 20 (journal p. 59) ---
 The Kings of Easter Island
 59
 " in former days the almost despotical power of the king
 contrasted with the condition of the people." Gana (6,
 p. 32) expresses it in more or less the same way, but since
 his report is only a badly misinterpreted compilation of the
 data collected by Roussel it is best to discard his discussion.
 Far more important is Thompson's contribution (17, p. 473).
 He writes :
 " The ancient government of Easter Island was
 an arbitrary monarchy. The supreme authority was
 vested in a king and was hereditary in his family.
 The person of the king was held sacred. Clan fights
 and internecine struggles were common, but the royal
 person and family were unmolested. The king reigned
 over the entire island and was not disturbed by the
 defeat cr the victory of any of the clans. The island
 was divided into districts having names and governed
 by chiefs, all of whom acknowledged the supremacy
 of the king. The title of chief was also hereditary,
 and descended from father to son, but the king
 reserved the right to remove or put to death any of
 them and of naming a successor from the people of
 the clan . . . disputes were settled by king or chief
 without regard to law or justice. It does not appear
 that any great homage was paid the king, and no
 tax was expected of the people."
 Although in some details Thompson's text seems to
 contradict my views on the lack of political authority of
 the king, it contains some other information which supports
 my conception of the king's power on Easter island. Here
 again is a precise statement about the sacredness of the
 king's person, and about the little deference the chiefs paid
 him when they wanted to fight. The statement that no
 great homage was paid to the king may be interpreted
 as disregard of his authority. As a matter of fact, being
 the descendant of the first king who settled on the island
 and thus of the gods, his would have been a status superior
 to that of the other ariki, chiefs of the various descent
 groups. But had he real influence or authority over them ?
 Thompson asserts that he had, but there is no way to check
 his statement. It is probable that owing to his prestige
 the king might have acted as a mediator in quarrels. Why
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 21 (journal p. 60) ---
 60 JOURNAL OF THE POLYNESIAN SOCIETY
 then did he not interfere in the wars of the descent-groups?
 An historical incident which occurred a little before 1862
 illustrates strikingly the insignificance of the king's political
 position. The Ngaure descent-group succeeded in defeating
 the Miru whom they took as slaves (mata-kio). The king,
 his son Kamakoi, and his grandson Maurata were held in
 captivity in the territory of the Ngaure and were not rescued
 until a few years later by the Miru who had in the meantime
 united with the Tupahotu.
 The ariki-mau was respected because of his pedigree
 which related him with the gods and because of the
 sacredness of his person, but he was certainly not a ruler or
 civilian chief. He transmitted the mana of the god, and it
 was necessary for the welfare of the island to keep him, but
 beyond this usefulness he was not allowed to enjoy any
 real power other than this more or less strictly religious
 and aristocratic prestige.
 Williamson, in his great work on social organization
 in Central Polynesia (19, vol. 1, p. 405), presents the
 hypothesis that the kingship of Easter island was of a
 double nature. According to him, besides the ordinary king
 there was a secular king elected each year during the feasts
 of Orongo and invested with power for only one year. This
 second king was the tangata-manu (bird man). Williamson's
 principal authority is Gana who misused the information
 he obtained from Roussel. But even one of the missionaries
 (Ollivier, 12, p. 256) had adopted the same standpoint. The
 more detailed accounts of Thompson (17, p. 483) and of
 Routledge (16, pp. 254-266) of the bird-cult, together with
 some scattered evidence gathered by me, do not speak in
 favour of Williamson's hypothesis. This is not the place
 to discuss the deep significance of the bird-cult, which
 seems to have conveyed certain privileges to those who took
 part in the race for the first manutara egg. The winner
 seems to have been endowed with religious power which
 manifested itself in the right to plunder and to bully others.
 To be able to enjoy such a favoured position one had to
 be a mata-toa (a warrior or chief) and to belong to a descent
 group in the ascendancy. The analysis of available docu
 ments had already induced me to consider the tangata-manu
 as a man incarnating provisionally the god Makemake and
 entitled to rights of an aggressive nature. The reading of
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 22 (journal p. 61) ---
 The Kings of Easter Island
 61
 the recently published manuscript of Roussel (15, p. 427)
 confirmed my induction. He writes:
 " I will not repeat what has been said before, that
 the great chief was out of the ordinary affairs and
 that chance, the discovery of seabird eggs gave
 authority to those lucky enough to find them. They
 took the name of matortoa (warriors). But the
 investiture of such an authority began only after they
 had shaved their heads. Their activity consisted in
 marauding day and night and in trying to fool as
 many people as they could during the year they were
 in power, and in taking part in continuous feasts,
 the most childish and licentious.,,
 How should one define kingship on Easter island in
 view of all the evidence brought together? The king not
 only descended from the chief who first settled on the island,
 but he was able to trace his origin to the gods. He was
 the man with the most aristocratic pedigree and the most
 exalted social position on the island. His person was
 overflowing with mana and his sacredness caused him to
 be feared and respected. His function in society was to
 insure through his very being the abundance of crops and
 the fertility of the ground and to exercise his influence
 on animal life. From his sacredness derived certain
 religious activities, and he held supervisory control over
 various practices connected with religion. His political
 power was little.
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- PAGE 23 (journal p. 62) ---
 62 JOURNAL OF THE POLYNESIAN SOCIETY
 BIBLIOGRAPHY
 1. Behrens, C. F., Histoire de l'Exp?dition de Trois Vaisseaux . . . ,
 La Haye, 1729.
 2. Cook, James, A Voyage Towards the South Pole and Round the
 World . . . in the years 1772-75 (2nd voyage), 2 vols., London,
 1784.
 3. Cooke, G. H., " Te Pito Te Henna, known as Rapa Nui . . . ,"
 Smithsonian Institute, Annual Report Board of Regents . . . year
 ending June 30th, 1897. U.S. Nat. Mus., Rept., pt. 1, pp. 691-723,
 Washington, 1899.
 4. Estella, Bienvenido, Los misterios de la Isla de Pascua, Santiago
 de Chile, 1920.
 5. Forster, George, A Voyage Round the World, London, 1777.
 6. Gana, I. L., " Descripci?n cient?fica de la Isla de Pascua,"
 Biblioteca Geogr?fica ? Hist?rica Chilena de L. Ignacio Silva A,
 vol. 1, pp. 11-52, Santiago de Chile, 1903.
 7. Geiseler, Die Oster-Insel, Berlin, 1883.
 8. Jaussen, Tepano, " L'Ile de P?ques," Bulletin de G?ographie
 historique et descriptive, vol. 2, pp. 240-270, Paris, 1893.
 9. Lapelin, T. De, " L'Ile de P?ques," Revue maritime et coloniale,
 vol. 35, pp. 105-125, 526-544, Paris, 1872.
 10. Lesson, A., Les Polyn?siens, 4 vols., Paris, 1880-84.
 11. Meyer, A. B. and Jablonowski, J., " 24 Menschensch?del von der
 Oster-Insel," Abh. und Ber. des K?nigl. Zoolog, und Anthrop
 Etnographischen Museums zu Dresden, vol. 9, Berlin, 1901.
 12. Ollivier, Pacome, " Lettre du R. P. . . . au T.R.P. Euthyme
 Rouchouze," Annales de la propagation de la foi, vol. 39,
 pp. 250-259, Lyon, 1867.
 13. Palmer, J. H. L., " A Visit to Easter Island, or Rapa Nui, in
 1868," Royal Geographical Society Journal, vol. 40, pp. 167-181,
 London, 1870.
 14. Pinart, Alphonse, " Voyage ? l'Ile de P?ques," Le Tour du Monde,
 vol. 27, pp. 225-240, Paris, 1878.
 15. Roussel, Hippolyte, " Ile de P?ques," Annales des Sacr?s-Coeurs,
 nos. 305-309, pp. 355-360, 423-430, 462-466, 495-499, 1926.
 16. Routledge, Mrs. Scoresby, The Mystery of Easter Island, London,
 1919.
 17. Thompson, W. F., " Te Pito Te Henua or Easter Island," Smith
 sonian Institute, Annual Report for 1889, pp. 447-553, Washington,
 1891.
 18. Tregear, E., " Easter Island," Journal of the Polynesian Society,
 vol. 1, pp. 95-102, Wellington, 1892.
 19. Williamson, R. W., The Social and Political Systems of Central
 Polynesia, 3 vols., Cambridge, 1924.
 20. Zumbohm, Gaspard, " Lettres du ... au Directeur des Annales
 sur la mission de l'?le de P?ques," Annales de la Congregation
 des Sacr?s-Coeurs de J?sus et de Marie, vol. 5, pp. 660-667,
 Paris, 1879.
This content downloaded from 
128.226.158.47 on Sun, 15 Mar 2026 02:02:09 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

